          Summary


          Trinity Term
          [2014] UKSC 46
          On appeal from: [2012] EWCA Civ 26


          JUDGMENT

              Coventry and others (Respondents) v Lawrence and another
              (Appellants) (No 2)

          before

          Lord Neuberger, President
          Lord Mance
          Lord Clarke
          Lord Sumption

          Lord Carnwath

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          23 July 2014

          Heard on 12 May 2014

      Appellant
      Stephen Hockman QC
      William Upton
      (Instructed by Richard Buxton Environmental and Public Law) 	  	1st
      Respondent
      Robert McCracken QC
      Sebastian Kokelaar
      (Instructed by Pooley Bendall Watson)
        	  	 
        	  	2nd Respondent
      Edward Denehan
      Giselle McGowan
      (Instructed by Hewitsons LLP)

      LORD NEUBERGER (with whom Lord Clarke and Lord Sumption Agree)

          Introductory

   1. This judgment is concerned with a number of points which arise from
      this Court's decision in Coventry v Lawrence [2014] UKSC 13, [2014] 2
      WLR 433. By that decision, we held that the occupiers of a Stadium,
      David Coventry trading as RDC Promotions, and a Track, Moto-Land UK
      Limited, were liable in nuisance to the appellants, Katherine
      Lawrence and Raymond Shields, who were the owners and occupiers of a
      residential bungalow, Fenland, some 850 yards away. The nuisance
      arose from the use of the Stadium for speedway racing and other
      motorcar racing, and the use of the Track for motorcycle racing and
      similar activities.

   2. A summary of the factual and procedural history is set out in paras
      7-27 of our earlier judgment. The appellants brought their
      proceedings not only against Mr Coventry and Moto-Land ("the
      respondents"), but also against their respective landlords, Terence
      Waters and Anthony Morley and a predecessor landlord ("the
      Landlords"). The effect of our decision was to reverse the Court of
      Appeal and to restore the trial judge's order of 4 March 2011, which
      was based on his finding that the respondents were liable in nuisance
      but the Landlords were not so liable. By the time of the trial,
      Fenland was unoccupied owing to a fire, and it remains in its
      fire-damaged state to this day.

   3. The order made by the Judge included (i) an injunction against the
      respondents limiting the levels of noise which could be emitted from
      the Stadium and the Track "to take effect on 1 January 2012 or, if
      [earlier, when] Fenland is again made fit for occupation", (ii)
      permission to the parties "to apply to vary the terms of this
      injunction not earlier than 1 October 2011", (iii) awards of damages
      of some £10,350 against each of the two respondents, (iv) a provision
      dismissing the claims against the landlords, and (v) a direction that
      the respondents pay 60% of the appellants' costs, to be subject to
      detailed assessment.

   4. Subject to further arguments, the effect of our earlier decision is
      to restore the orders for an injunction and for damages referred to
      in items (i) and (iii) above, and also the order for costs recorded
      in item (v). Four further or consequential issues now arise, and they
      are as follows. First, in relation to item (i), should the injunction
      be suspended until Fenland is rebuilt? The second issue, which arises
      out of item (ii), is when the parties should be able to apply to the
      judge. The third issue, which is raised by item (iv), is whether the
      Landlords are also liable to the appellants in nuisance. The fourth
      issue, which concerns item (v), is whether the order for costs
      against the respondents infringes article 6 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights ("the Convention"). The first two issues
      are of no general application, the third issue is of some
      significance, and the fourth issue concerns a matter which is
      important.

          The two minor issues

   5. On the first minor issue, the respondents contend that the injunction
      should be suspended until Fenland is rebuilt and fit to be occupied
      again as a residence, whereas the appellants argue that, as the Judge
      decided, there should be a specific "long-stop" date, by which the
      injunction should take effect irrespective of the physical state of
      Fenland. On the face of it, at any rate, it seems to me that there is
      no reason why the injunction should start to bite so long as Fenland
      remains unoccupiable. The purpose of the injunction is to prevent
      activities at the Stadium and on the Track interfering with the
      ordinary residential use and enjoyment of Fenland. So long as such
      use and enjoyment is not possible, it is hard to see what
      justification there can be for maintaining the injunction: it would
      cause damage to the respondents with no concomitant benefit to the
      appellants.

   6. There are arguments the other way, but they are unpersuasive. Thus,
      the Judge imposed a long-stop date, but (i) there is no apparent
      justification for it, and (ii) the date has long passed anyway, so
      this Court is free to exercise its own discretionary power. It is
      also said that there is reason to believe that the fire may have been
      started by one of the many people in the locality who support the
      continuation of the respondents' activities. That is no more than a
      suspicion, and the Judge was unable to decide whether the fire had
      occurred accidentally or had been started deliberately. He did find
      that an earlier attack on Fenland with a forklift truck had been "to
      exact revenge upon [the appellants] for the difficulties their
      complaints had caused to the activities at the Stadium or at the
      Track", although there was no proof as to who was responsible. In my
      view, unless it could be shown that the fact that injunction was
      still suspended in some way prevented Fenland being restored, I do
      not see why it should take effect before Fenland is restored.

   7. It was also argued that the effect of this decision would be that the
      respondents "could postpone indefinitely the date when the injunction
      will take effect". However, it is not the respondents, but the
      appellants, who, by putting off the restoration of Fenland (as they
      are of course quite entitled to do) can indefinitely postpone the
      coming into force of the injunction. As the injunction is for the
      benefit of the residential use and occupation of Fenland, that is
      scarcely a surprising state of affairs.

   8. Turning to the second minor issue, I do not consider that there
      should be a delay before the parties are able to apply to vary the
      injunction. The Judge thought that there should a delay, apparently
      to enable either party to argue that the terms of the injunction were
      not satisfactory in practice. The appellants contend that, given that
      this was a matter for the Judge, this Court should adopt the same
      approach. However, the Judge's approach was inherently flawed as,
      under his order, the injunction would not have come into effect under
      item (i) above before either party could have made an application
      under item (ii).

   9. Even more importantly, at least one reason which the respondents will
      very probably have in applying to the court is to argue that the
      court should discharge the injunction on the ground that damages
      would be an adequate remedy. As explained in para 149-151 of our
      earlier judgment, in the light of the state of the authorities before
      we gave our judgment, this argument was understandably not regarded
      as having much prospect of success, and therefore was not run by the
      respondents below. However, it now has a prospect of success, and, as
      is stated in para 152 of the earlier judgment, it should be
      considered on its merits if it is indeed raised. There is therefore
      now a good reason, which did not exist when the Judge's order was
      being considered, for the respondents to be able to apply without
      having to wait.

          The first main issue: the liability of the Landlords in nuisance

  10. The first main issue concerns the extent to which the Landlords
      should be held liable for nuisance which is caused by their tenants,
      the respondents. At trial, the Landlords do not seem to have made
      much of the argument that they were in a different position from the
      respondents. It appears that it was the Judge who took the point that
      the terms of the leases under which the respondents occupied the
      Stadium and the Track ("the Leases") contained covenants against
      nuisance, and that the law as set out in Clerk & Lindsell on Torts,
      20th edition, para 20-81, indicated that landlords are not liable for
      nuisance created by their tenants, unless the nuisance was close to
      inevitable as a result of the letting. On that basis, relying
      primarily on the terms of the Leases, he dismissed the claims against
      the Landlords. That decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal on the
      ground that there was no nuisance, and therefore no consideration was
      given to the question whether the Judge's reasons for rejecting the
      claims against the Landlords were justified. However, now that we
      have held that the respondents are liable in nuisance, the question
      which arises is whether the Judge was right in holding that their
      Landlords were nonetheless not liable. I should perhaps add that the
      appellants' cross-appeal on this issue to the Court of Appeal related
      simply to Terence Waters ("Mr Waters") and his son James, although
      claims had been made unsuccessfully against one other defendant under
      this head.

  11. The law relating to the liability of a landlord for his tenant's
      nuisance is tolerably clear in terms of principle. Lord Millett
      explained in Southwark London Borough Council v Mills [2001] 1 AC 1,
      22A, that, where activities constitute a nuisance, the general
      principle is that "the … persons directly responsible for the
      activities in question are liable; but so too is anyone who
      authorised them". As he then said, when it comes to the specific
      issue of landlords' liability for their tenant's nuisance, "[i]t is
      not enough for them to be aware of the nuisance and take no steps to
      prevent it". In order to be liable for authorising a nuisance, the
      landlords "must either participate directly in the commission of the
      nuisance, or they must be taken to have authorised it by letting the
      property".

  12. In Smith v Scott [1973] Ch 314, referred to with approval by Lord
      Hoffmann in Mills at p 15D-E, Sir John Pennycuick V-C considered at p
      321C-D the appropriate test to be applied in order to decide whether
      landlords had authorised a nuisance by letting a property from which
      the tenant caused the nuisance. He described "the authorities … [as]
      not altogether satisfactory", but decided that they suggested that it
      must be a "virtual certainty", or there must be "a very high degree
      of probability", that a letting will result in a nuisance before the
      landlords can be held liable for the nuisance. As Pickford LJ put it
      in a case cited with approval by Lord Millett in Mills at p 22A,
      Malzy v Eichholz [1916] 2 KB 308, 319, "[a]uthority to conduct a
      business is not an authority to conduct it as to create a nuisance,
      unless the business cannot be conducted without a nuisance", a view
      shared by Lord Cozens-Hardy MR at pp 315-316.

  13. When it comes to landlords being liable for their tenant's nuisance
      by participating in the nuisance, as a result of acts or omissions
      subsequent to the grant of the lease, the law was considered
      authoritatively in Malzy. Lord Cozens-Hardy at p 316 had no
      hesitation in rejecting as "an extraordinary proposition" the
      contention that landlords could be rendered liable by accepting rent
      and refraining from taking any proceedings against their tenant, once
      they knew that their tenant was creating a nuisance. As he put it at
      p 315, by reference to an earlier, unreported case, "there must be
      such circumstances as to found an inference that the landlord
      actively participated in the [relevant] use of the [property]", and
      he referred a little later to the need for "actual participation by
      [the landlord] or his agents".

  14. It was suggested that two decisions of the Court of Appeal, Sampson v
      Hodson-Pressinger [1981] 3 All ER 710 and Chartered Trust Plc v
      Davies [1997] 2 EGLR 83, demonstrated that the law has developed
      since Malzy, so that it is now less easy for landlords to escape
      liability for their tenant's nuisance than it was 100 years ago. We
      were not referred to any social, economic, technological or moral
      developments over the past century in order to justify a change in
      the law on this topic; indeed, as already mentioned, Smith (where Sir
      John Pennycuick relied on 19th century cases) and Malzy (which was
      decided a century ago) were both cited with approval in the House of
      Lords less than 15 years ago. Sampson was discussed in Mills at p
      16B-D by Lord Hoffmann, whose implied doubts about the decision I
      share. If, which I would leave open, the defendant landlords in
      Sampson were rightly held liable for nuisance in that case to the
      plaintiff tenant, it could only have been on the basis that the
      ordinary residential user of the neighbouring flat which they had let
      would inevitably have involved a nuisance as a result of the use of
      that flat's balcony. In Chartered, although the nuisance resulted
      from the tenant's use of the property, the actual nuisance was caused
      by people assembling in the common parts, impeding access to the
      plaintiff's property. Since the landlords were in possession and
      control of the common parts, where the nuisance was occurring, the
      decision may well have been justified on orthodox grounds, although,
      again, I would not want to be taken as approving (or indeed
      disapproving) the decision that there was a valid claim against the
      landlords in nuisance in that case.

  15. In the present case, there can be no question of the Landlords being
      liable to the appellants for the nuisance on the ground that it was
      an inevitable, or nearly certain, consequence of the letting to
      respondent tenants of their respective demised premises, the Stadium
      and the Track. The intended uses of those properties were well known
      to the Landlords at the time of the lettings and those uses have in
      fact resulted in nuisance, but that is not enough to render the
      Landlords liable in nuisance as a result of the letting. It is clear
      from what the Judge said in his judgment and from the terms of the
      injunction he granted that those uses could be, and could have been,
      carried on without causing a nuisance to the appellants. It also
      appears that, in the past, the use of the Stadium and the Track may
      well not have given rise to any nuisance. Accordingly, the Landlords
      cannot be liable in nuisance as a result of having let the Stadium
      and Track to the respondents.

  16. In reaching the same conclusion, the Judge was primarily impressed by
      the inclusion of covenants against nuisance in the Leases.
      Unfortunately, as is common ground, he misinterpreted the relevant
      clause in the Motoland lease. Even if the landlords would have been
      assisted by a clause prohibiting nuisance, this was not such a
      clause. On the contrary the prohibition was "subject to" the tenant
      being allowed to use the premises for the permitted motor-cycle use.
      This might be taken, if anything, as an indication that the landlords
      had accepted the risk that the permitted use might cause a nuisance,
      and deprived themselves of power through the lease to do anything
      about it.

  17. I doubt in any event that such covenants could take matters further
      either way. If, at the time that the Leases were granted, it was
      inevitable, or close to inevitable, that the proposed or permitted
      uses would result in nuisance, then I do not think that the Landlords
      could have escaped liability by simply taking, or having taken, a
      covenant against nuisance (even assuming that the covenant, properly
      construed, would have served to prevent nuisance from the proposed or
      permitted uses in such circumstances). If, as was held in Malzy,
      landlords do not become liable for their tenant's nuisance simply by
      failing to enforce a covenant which would put an end to the nuisance,
      it must follow that, if landlords would otherwise be liable for their
      tenant's nuisance, they should not escape liability simply by
      including such a covenant in the lease. Conversely, in a case such as
      the present where the proposed uses would not necessarily result in
      nuisance, I do not consider that the Landlords' position would have
      been weaker if the Leases had contained no covenant against nuisance.
      As Lord Cozens-Hardy MR put it in Malzy at p 319 it is wrong to
      "render [the landlord] a sort of trustee of [such a] covenant for the
      benefit of [a neighbour]".

  18. Accordingly, if the claim in nuisance against the Landlords is to
      succeed, it must be based on their "active" or "direct" participation
      to use the adjectives employed by Lord Cozens-Hardy in Malzy and by
      Lord Millett in Mills. The judge appears to have ignored this
      alternative. Although he referred to the allegations of
      "orchestration" by Terence Waters, he regarded them as potentially
      relevant only to a separate claim of harassment, which had not been
      pleaded. Accordingly he made no, or limited, findings on this issue.
      That failure is attributable to the fact that the Landlords did not
      raise at trial the argument that they should not be liable for
      nuisance if the respondents were so liable, and, as mentioned above,
      it was the Judge who raised the point, and he went on to decide it on
      the misconceived basis described in para 16 above. In this Court, the
      appellants expressly disclaimed the right to contend that it was not
      open to the Landlords to rely on the argument that they had not
      authorised or participated in the nuisance despite not having taken
      the point properly at first instance. While I appreciate the concern
      shared by Lord Mance and Lord Carnwath in finding for the Landlords
      in these circumstances, I consider that we have to do our best to
      arrive at the right result in the light of the evidence and the
      findings which the Judge made.

  19. This creates a difficulty for this court. Although there is little
      authority on the issue, the question whether a landlord has directly
      participated in a nuisance must be largely one of fact for the trial
      judge, rather than law. The difficulty is compounded by the lack of
      pleadings on the point, attributable no doubt to the late stage at
      which it emerged. In other circumstances it might be appropriate to
      remit the matter for further findings on this issue. However, this
      was not sought by any of the parties, for understandable reasons,
      given the exorbitant expenditure of time and money already incurred.
      Accordingly we must do our best on the available material to decide
      whether the Landlords directly participated in the respondents'
      nuisance-creating activities.

  20. It is clear in my view that the issue whether a landlord directly
      participated in his tenant's nuisance must turn principally on what
      happened subsequent to the grant of the Leases, although that may
      take colour from the nature and circumstances of the grant and what
      preceded it. In this case, Lord Carnwath considers that it is
      significant that (i) Mr Waters (and his son James) had been using the
      Stadium before the grant of the lease of it in 2005 and had tried to
      revive its commercial use in 2008, and (ii) Mr Waters initially
      developed the Track and used it from 1992 until the grant of the
      lease. I consider that information is of very marginal relevance to
      the question whether they directly or actively participated in the
      nuisance while the Stadium was let. At the most it may fairly be said
      to render it a little more probable that they participated, but in my
      view that is as far as it is likely to go in this case.

  21. In this case, the appellants rely on a number of factors to establish
      their case that Mr Waters participated in the nuisance. In
      particular, they rely on the fact that Mr Waters (i) did nothing as
      landlord to try to persuade his tenant to reduce the noise, (ii)
      erected a hay-bale wall around Fenland to discourage complaints and
      to keep down the noise, (iii) co-ordinated all dealings with the
      local authority on noise issues, leading for the respondents in
      discussions, (iv) appealed against the noise abatement notice served
      by the local authority in respect of the noise emanating from the
      Stadium and the Track, and (v) co-ordinated the response to the
      appellants' complaints about the noise, and often responded himself.
      I shall concentrate on the case against Mr Waters, as, if it fails,
      the case against his son James must fail, as the grounds for holding
      him liable are weaker.

  22. As to point (i), the fact that a landlord does nothing to stop or
      discourage a tenant from causing a nuisance cannot amount to
      "participating" in the nuisance (to use the expression employed by
      Lord Millett and Lord Cozens-Hardy). As a matter of principle, even
      if a person has the power to prevent the nuisance, inaction or
      failure to act cannot, on its own, amount to authorising the
      nuisance. As already discussed, that is strongly supported by the
      reasoning in Malzy.

  23. I also consider point (ii) to be of very limited force. Absent very
      unusual circumstances, the fact that a landlord takes steps to
      mitigate a nuisance can scarcely give rise to the inference that he
      has authorised it. It is somewhat ironic that the appellants argue
      that Mr Waters should be liable for the nuisance because he did not
      take steps to prevent it, and then argue that the fact that he took
      steps to reduce the nuisance supports the contention that he is
      liable for it. Constructing the wall on land adjacent to Fenland
      could, it is fair to say, be regarded as a somewhat aggressive act.
      Indeed, the Judge said that he "should have been inclined to regard
      [it] as an aggravating feature to be reflected in an award of
      damages, had [Mr Waters] been found to be liable in nuisance", but,
      as he immediately went on to observe, "that does not mean that Mr
      Waters thereby participated in the nuisance".

  24. Points (iii), (iv) and (v), which are all based on Mr Waters' leading
      part in fighting off the risk of nuisance abatement by the local
      authority and claims in common law, have somewhat more force, but,
      even taken together, they do not persuade me that Mr Waters
      participated in the nuisance. Any landlord, whose premises were being
      lawfully used for motor car and motorbike racing, would naturally
      wish to avoid, or else to minimise, any restriction on the emission
      of noise from the premises, whether by the local authority or by the
      court. Any such restriction would be very likely adversely to affect
      the value of his reversionary interest, as it would risk curtailing
      the racing activities on the premises, and therefore the commercial
      attraction of the premises, which in turn could be expected to
      depreciate the capital and rental values of the premises. On that
      ground alone, I find it hard to accept that, by trying to fight off
      allegations of nuisance against his tenants, a landlord can be said
      to be participating or authorising the nuisance.

  25. So far as point (iii) is concerned, a noise abatement notice was
      served by the local authority in December 2007, and it included a
      requirement for certain attenuation works, which were eventually
      carried out in January 2009. It is clear that, particularly during
      2007, Mr Waters spoke against the service of an abatement notice and
      any further steps to curtail the activities at the Stadium and Track,
      at a number of meetings between the owners and operators of the
      Stadium and the Track and representatives of the local authority, and
      that in 2008 he made further representations about the need for any
      noise attenuation works. However, it has to be borne in mind that he
      was a local councillor and therefore had a legitimate interest in
      that capacity so far as the activities at the Stadium and the Track
      were concerned. Those activities commanded quite a lot of local
      support, as well as local opposition, and the fact that he spoke in
      support of them at such meetings is of less assistance to the
      appellants' case than if he had not been a councillor.

  26. Nonetheless, while Mr Waters' position as a councillor can fairly
      justify much of his involvement, I find it hard to accept that it can
      explain everything that he said at such meetings in support of the
      local authority taking no steps to curtail the activities at the
      Stadium or Track. In my view, however, the fact that a landlord seeks
      to persuade a local authority not to take action in relation to
      alleged noise or other nuisance emanating from his tenant's
      activities does not involve his authorising or participating in the
      nuisance caused by those activities. It is worth recalling that the
      notion of authorising or participating in a nuisance is not limited
      to landlords: as Lord Millett pointed out in Mills, the notion of
      authorising and participating in a nuisance is a general principle of
      tortious liability Any person with an interest in the activities
      continuing, such as a local inhabitant, a participant, a spectator,
      or a person with an economic interest (eg someone employed at the
      Stadium or Track, with a car or bike manufacturing or repair
      business, or with a betting operation), might seek to persuade the
      local authority against taking action aimed at curtailing the
      activities. Such a person would not thereby be authorising or
      participating in the nuisance, so as to become liable for it. It
      would therefore be illogical if a landlord could be held liable
      because he takes such a course because of his economic interests. The
      fact that he joins with his tenant, even taking the lead, in making
      representations to the local authority cannot of itself undermine
      this analysis. The most it can do is to reinforce other factors which
      support the contention that he has authorised or participated in the
      nuisance.

  27. The fact that Mr Waters was a party to the appeal against the
      abatement notice when it was served in December 2007, point (iv), is
      not a powerful point. If he had been served with the notice, he was
      perfectly entitled to appeal against it. Even if he was not bound to
      appeal against it, indeed even if he was not served with it, a
      landlord may well wish to ensure that his reversionary interest in
      the property concerned is not damaged by such a notice.

  28. Point (v), that Mr Waters was primarily responsible for replying to
      the complaints made by the appellants' solicitors in 2007 and 2009,
      is again explicable by reference to his interest as landlord in not
      having the use of the premises impeded. Further, given that he had
      much of the relevant information available to him as a councillor,
      and as a result of his discussions with the local authority, it is
      unsurprising that the detailed responses came from him. In any event,
      it appears that he was unaware that, as landlord, he was unlikely to
      be held liable for common law nuisance in any event, a point I return
      to in para 31 below.

  29. On behalf of the Landlords, Mr Denehan and Ms McGowan (neither of
      whom appeared at first instance) said that, during the time that
      nuisance is alleged by the appellants, the Landlords had no
      involvement in the activities carried on at the Stadium and the
      Track, they were not in possession of the Stadium or the Track, they
      enjoyed no share of the profits made from the activities at the
      Stadium and the Track, and their actions cannot be said to have been
      causative of the nuisance in any way. Those points are well founded,
      save that by playing a substantial part in seeking to fight off the
      local authority's noise concerns, Mr Waters may well have indirectly
      caused a degree of nuisance, as he may have delayed service of the
      noise abatement notice, and he may have caused the noise levels to
      have been at a higher level than they would otherwise have been. But
      that is quite insufficient to amount to authorising or participating
      in the nuisance.

  30. For the reasons which I have given, none of the five points relied on
      by the appellants make good the contention that Mr Waters authorised
      or participated in the nuisance. While I agree with Lord Carnwath
      that they show that Mr Waters went further than most landlords would
      have done, I do not consider that, as a matter of ordinary language,
      any of the grounds relied on can be said to involve Mr Waters
      actively or directly participating in the respondents' nuisance. I
      acknowledge that it is, at least in principle, possible that five
      points which, when taken separately cannot justify a certain
      conclusion, could, when taken together, justify that conclusion.
      Nonetheless, in relation to the five points relied on in this case,
      the reasons why each is not strong enough to enable the appellants to
      fix liability on Mr Waters are such that I do not see how they could
      fix such liability between them.

  31. Before turning to the final issue, it is right to say that, although
      I would uphold the dismissal of the appellants' claim against the
      Landlords, my current view is that there should be no order for costs
      as between the appellants and the Landlords. The legal basis on which
      the Landlords have succeeded in this Court is not merely different
      from that on which they succeeded before the Judge: it is a basis
      which was not pleaded or developed in argument before the Judge.
      While the appellants expressly disclaimed any objection to the
      Landlords resting their case on this basis in this Court, it seems to
      me, at least at the moment, that the right course to take on costs as
      between the appellants and the Landlords is to let them lie where
      they fall. At one extreme, the Landlords could say that they should
      have their costs because they have fought off the appellants' claim
      against them. At the other extreme, the appellants could say that
      they should have all their costs until the Landlords formally raised
      the point on which they have succeeded. Further, this could be said
      to be one of those unusual cases where the successful party brought
      the proceedings on himself (in the form of unusually confrontational
      behaviour – for instance as mentioned in para 19 above).

          The second main issue: the level of costs

  32. The final issue arises out of the Judge's order for costs, namely
      that the respondents should pay 60% of the appellants' costs. The
      appellants' costs at first instance consisted of three components, as
      permitted by the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 as amended by
      sections 27-31 in Part II of the Access to Justice Act 1999. The
      first was the "base costs", ie what their lawyers charged on the
      traditional basis, which was, in crude terms, calculated on an hourly
      rate and the costs of disbursements. The second component was the
      success fee (or uplift) to which the lawyers were entitled, because
      they were providing their services on a conditional fee (or no win no
      fee) basis. The third component was the so-called ATE premium, a sum
      which is payable to an insurer who agreed to underwrite the
      appellants' potential liability to the respondents for their costs if
      the respondents had won. The appellants' base costs amounted to
      £398,000; the success fee, which (we will assume) was at the maximum
      permitted level of 100%, amounted to £319,000-odd (as the uplift does
      not apply to every item of costs), and the ATE premium was apparently
      about £350,000.

  33. Accordingly, if the respondents had been liable for the whole of the
      appellants' costs up to the date the Judge made the order, they would
      have had to pay the appellants around £1,067,000. As it is they are
      liable for over £640,000.

  34. These figures are very disturbing.

  35. They give rise to grave concern even if one ignores the success fee
      and ATE premium. The fact that it can cost two citizens £400,000 in
      legal fees and disbursements to establish and enforce their right to
      live in peace in their home is on any view highly regrettable. The
      point is reinforced when one takes into account the value of their
      home, which is less than £300,000 (coupled with the effect of the
      nuisance on that value, £74,000 at the most) and the fact that there
      will have been very significant further "base costs" incurred as a
      result of four-day appeals in the Court of Appeal and this Court. The
      point can equally forcefully be made from the point of view of the
      respondents. As relatively small business operators, they are not
      only having to fund their own costs, which presumably would be of the
      same order, but in addition they are going to have to pay some
      £240,000 towards the appellants' costs. It is true that the
      respondents lost, but they were seeking to defend their businesses
      and they plainly had a reasonable case, as is evidenced by the fact
      that they won in the Court of Appeal.

  36. One of the main, and laudable, aims of the proposals made by Lord
      Woolf in his report Access to Justice (1996), which led to the
      enactment of the Civil Procedure Act 1997, and the introduction of
      the Civil Procedure Rules the following year, was to try and achieve
      a better relationship between the costs and benefits of litigation.
      As the figures in this case show, and as is reflected in many other
      cases, that target has not merely proved elusive, but it is often
      missed by a very wide margin indeed. It is, of course, easy to
      criticise, and, having been Master of the Rolls until 2013, I am as
      aware as anyone how hard it is to ensure that a case, particularly
      one that does not involve a very large sum of money but is
      potentially complex in terms of fact, law and expertise, such as the
      present case, is both properly and proportionately litigated. It is
      also right to acknowledge that the reforms proposed by Sir Rupert
      Jackson in 2010, which do not apply to this case, have been largely
      introduced and are being absorbed. Nonetheless, even without the
      effect of Part II of the 1999 Act, to which I must shortly turn, it
      would be wrong for this Court not to express its grave concern about
      the base costs in this case, and express the hope that those
      responsible for civil justice in England and Wales are considering
      what further steps can be taken to ensure better access to justice.
      It is only fair to emphasise that this concern relates to the current
      system and that it is not intended to imply any criticism of the
      lawyers in this case.

  37. The amount of the base costs in this case is however dwarfed by the
      total potentially recoverable costs, which are nearly three times as
      much. The figures illustrate the malign influence of the amendments
      made to the 1990 Act by Part II of the 1999 Act, and as implemented
      through CPR rule 44 and CPR44 PD – now fortunately repealed and
      replaced by the provisions of Part 2 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
      Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, following Sir Rupert Jackson's
      Review of Civil Litigation Costs (2010), referred to above. As Sir
      Rupert pointed out in his Review, and as is explained in Zuckerman on
      Civil Procedure Principles and Practice (3rd ed 2013), the system
      introduced in 1999 had a number of unique and regrettable features,
      four of which are worth mentioning for present purposes. First,
      claimants had no interest whatever in the level of base costs,
      success fee or ATE premium which they agreed with their lawyers, as,
      if they lost they had to pay nothing, and if they won the costs would
      all be paid by the defendants, who, on the other hand, had no say
      about the costs (other than retrospectively on an assessment).
      Secondly, in many cases, unsuccessful defendants found themselves
      paying, in addition to the whole of their own costs, three times the
      claimants' "real" costs. Thirdly, while proportionality had a part to
      play when assessing the recoverability of base costs (albeit a
      limited part – see Home Office v Lownds [2002] 1 WLR 2450), it was
      excluded from consideration in relation to the recovery of success
      fee or ATE premium (which were simply required to be reasonable) –
      see CPR44 PD, paras 11.7-11.10. Fourthly, the stronger the
      defendants' case, the greater their liability for costs would be if
      they lost, as the size of the success fee and the ATE premium should
      have reflected the claimants' prospects of success.

  38. Even accepting that they have no complaint about their liability for
      60% of the appellants' base costs, the respondents are understandably
      aggrieved by the consequences of the Judge's order that they pay 60%
      of the appellants' costs, because it means that they have to pay (i)
      60% of the 100% success fee, and (ii) 60% of the ATE premium. Mr
      McCracken QC contends on their behalf that this is a grievance which
      can be accorded legal recognition through article 6 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights and/or article 1 of the First Protocol to
      the Convention ("A1P1"). His argument is that, by virtue of section 6
      of the Human Rights Act 1998 the court, as a public body, must
      exercise its discretion when awarding costs in accordance with the
      Convention, save where otherwise required by primary legislation
      (such as the 1990 and 1999 Acts), and that secondary legislation
      (such as the CPR and Practice Directions) must be disapplied where it
      requires otherwise. Relying on the judgments of the Strasbourg Court
      in MGN Limited v United Kingdom (2011) 53 EHRR 5 and Dombo Beheer BV
      v Netherlands (1994) 18 EHRR 213, he contends that article 6 would be
      infringed if the court required the respondents to pay 60% of the
      success fee and the ATE premium. As to A1P1, he relies on the
      reasoning of the Strasbourg court in James v United Kingdom (1986) 8
      EHRR 123.

  39. In MGN v UK at para 217, the Strasbourg Court said that "the depth
      and nature of the flaws in the system" introduced by the 1999 Act and
      the provisions of the CPR referred to above were "such that the Court
      can conclude that [it] exceeded even the broad margin of appreciation
      to be accorded to the State in respect of general measures pursuing
      social and economic interests". That provides some support for the
      respondents' case. However, the observation and the decision itself
      were made in connection with an alleged infringement of article 10,
      where the claimant was rich enough not to need to take advantage of a
      conditional fee agreement. In the present case, by contrast, article
      10 does not apply and it is apparent that the appellants needed the
      protection of a conditional fee agreement and recoverable ATE premium
      in order to be able to bring their claim. Dombo Beheer was a case
      concerned with article 6, and the Strasbourg court said that it was
      "clear that the requirement of 'equality of arms', in the sense of a
      'fair balance' between the parties applies in principle" to "cases
      concerning civil rights and obligations". However, it is by no means
      clear that that general observation would necessarily support the
      respondents' argument. In James v UK at para 50, the Strasbourg court
      said that, when someone is deprived of property, there must be "a
      reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed
      and the aim sought to be realised", and that "a 'fair balance' ….
      must be struck between the demands of the general interest of the
      community and the requirements of the protection of the individual's
      fundamental rights". I am unconvinced that this takes matters any
      further than the argument based on article 6.

  40. In Callery v Gray [2002] 1 WLR 2000, the House of Lords effectively
      confirmed that, subject to reasonableness, success fees and ATE
      premiums were recoverable, and in Campbell v MGN Ltd (No 2) [2005] 1
      WLR 3394, the House of Lords held that the 1999 Act costs recovery
      regime did not infringe article 10. However, as I have mentioned, the
      Strasbourg court took a different view in the latter case. In those
      circumstances, it must, in my view, follow that the issue of whether
      the 1999 Act costs regime, and in particular a claimant's right to
      recover any success fee and ATE premium from an unsuccessful
      defendant, infringes the Convention, is one which it is open to this
      Court to reconsider.

  41. In the light of the facts of this case and the Strasbourg court
      judgments relied on by Mr McCracken, it may be that the respondents
      are right in their contention that their liability for costs under
      the 1990 Act, as amended by Part II of the 1999 Act, and in
      accordance with the CPR, would be inconsistent with their Convention
      rights. However, it would be wrong for this Court to decide the point
      without the Government having had the opportunity to address the
      Court on the issue.

  42. This concern is based on the proposition that a declaration of
      incompatibility ought not be made by a court without the Government
      having the opportunity of addressing the court. It appears to me that
      there is a substantial argument to the effect that it is not merely
      secondary legislation, namely CPR 44 and CPR44 PD, but also Part II
      of the 1999 Act, which had the effect of requiring defendants who
      have been ordered to pay a claimant's costs to pay the uplift and ATE
      premium in full, subject to the uplift and premium having been
      reasonable, but irrespective of proportionality. Section 58A(6) of
      the 1990 Act (added by section 27 of the 1999 Act) provides that an
      order for costs "may, subject … to rules of court, include provision
      requiring the payment of any fees payable under a conditional fee
      agreement which provides for a success fee", and section 29 of the
      1999 Act has a similar provision in relation to an ATE premium. It is
      true that these provisions are not on their face mandatory, but it
      seems to me to be arguable that the costs charging and recovery
      system introduced by Part II of the 1999 Act simply would not work
      unless a claimant's success fee and ATE premium were recoverable in
      full, irrespective of proportionality, from a defendant who had been
      ordered to pay the claimant's costs.

  43. Accordingly, if the respondents' argument based on article 6 or A1P1
      is correct, it may well be that the proper outcome would not be to
      disregard paras 11.7-11.10 of CPR44 PD, but to grant a declaration of
      incompatibility, although that would be questionable as the relevant
      provisions of the 1990 and 1999 Acts have been repealed and replaced
      by a far less unsatisfactory system in Part 2 of the 2012 Act.
      Nonetheless, the system enacted in the 1999 Act remains in force in
      relation to litigation brought pursuant to conditional fee agreements
      made before April 2013 (see Simmonds v Castle (Practice Note) [2013]
      1 WLR 1239). Quite apart from that, a determination by a United
      Kingdom court that the provisions of the 1999 Act infringed article 6
      could have very serious consequences for the Government. Although the
      Strasbourg court would not be bound by the determination, it would, I
      suspect, be likely to agree or accept that conclusion, so that those
      litigants who had been "victims" of those provisions could well have
      a claim for compensation against the government for infringement of
      their article 6 rights.

  44. However, it would be inappropriate to go further into the contention
      that article 6 or A1P1 is infringed by the order for costs made
      against the respondents in this case. It seems to me that, if the
      respondents wish to maintain that contention, as they are plainly
      entitled to do, the present appeal should be re-listed for hearing
      before us, after appropriate notice has been given to the
      Attorney-General and the Secretary of State for Justice. In relation
      to that hearing, it is only right to flag up the point that, as Lord
      Bingham and Lord Hoffmann emphasised in Callery at paras 8 and 17
      respectively, it is the Court of Appeal which has the primary
      supervisory and judicial policy-making functions in connection with
      case-management, procedural and costs issues in the courts of England
      and Wales; and members of the Court of Appeal have far greater
      experience than the members of this Court on matters concerning
      costs. It may therefore be inappropriate for us to decide the point
      raised by the respondents without the benefit of the Court of
      Appeal's consideration of, and views on, the issue, particularly as
      there may be an argument that, although the outcome of the costs
      system produces an unattractive result in the present case, its
      compatibility has to be assessed by reference to the generality of
      cases, so that a few unfortunate results are inevitable. Further, as
      any claim based on the Convention is fact-sensitive, and because the
      issue here concerns first instance costs, it may be inappropriate for
      an appellate court to decide the issue without having the views of
      the trial Judge.

  45. Accordingly, quite how far this Court should go at this subsequent
      hearing will have to be considered at the time. At one extreme, it
      may be right simply to decide that all the various points are
      arguable but should be remitted to the Court of Appeal or a first
      instance judge. At the other extreme, if we thought it appropriate to
      do so (particularly if all parties were agreed on that course) we
      could determine all the issues. And there are clearly a number of
      intermediate possibilities. Once the interveners are identified, it
      would be appropriate to consider how the matter is to proceed –
      either at a short hearing or by way of written submissions. I would
      expect all those involved (including the Attorney-General and the
      Secretary of State for Justice, and any other intervener sanctioned
      by the Court) to try and seek an agreed procedure, and then to
      contact the Court Registrar in writing explaining what had been
      agreed and what had not been agreed, so far as the identification of
      the issues and proposed procedure was concerned. We could then
      consider that written material, and give appropriate directions.

  46. I have, somewhat unusually, dealt with questions of future procedure
      in this judgment, because I am very concerned indeed about the
      possibility of a further escalation in the already exorbitant costs
      in this case. If I was satisfied that there was any satisfactory way
      of proceeding without incurring the parties in further costs, I would
      eagerly grasp it, but, sadly, I cannot see any such course.

  47. However, it is also right to record that it was suggested in argument
      that, even if the respondents' article 6 or A1P1 rights were
      infringed by the present costs order, we could do nothing about it,
      as we would be interfering with the A1P1 rights of the appellants'
      solicitors and counsel. On the basis of the arguments we have heard
      so far, we are inclined to dismiss that argument, but it may have
      some prospect of success in so far as it is based on reliance by
      those solicitors and counsel on the House of Lords' decision in
      Campbell v MGN. Accordingly, it is an argument which the appellants
      are free to deploy if they are so advised.

  48. It remains to deal with the respondents' argument that their
      liability for costs under the 1999 Act costs recovery regime would
      infringe article 9 of the Aarhus Convention. Articles 9.3 and 9.4 of
      that Convention require "members of the public" to enjoy appropriate
      "access to administrative or judicial procedures" and "adequate and
      effective remedies", which involves them not being "prohibitively
      expensive". However, those articles are concerned with those who wish
      to "challenge acts and omissions … which contravene provisions of
      [the] national law which relate to the environment". That may well
      apply to a claimant seeking to prevent a common law nuisance by
      noise, but I do not see how it can extend to a defendant who is being
      sued for causing a nuisance by noise.

          Conclusion

  49. Accordingly, I conclude that:

                  a) The injunction against nuisance by noise imposed by
                  the Judge against the respondents should be suspended
                  until Fenland is fit to be occupied residentially,
                  subject to the next point;

                  b) The appellants and the respondents should each have
                  liberty to apply at any time to vary or discharge the
                  injunction, albeit on notice (save in case of urgency);

                  c) The respondents' claim in nuisance against the
                  Landlords is dismissed, but, albeit that this is a
                  preliminary view, the Landlords should recover no costs;

                  d) Consideration of the respondents' contention that the
                  Judge's order that the respondents' liability for costs
                  extends to the success fee and the ATE insurance premium
                  infringes their rights under article 6 of the Convention
                  is adjourned for further hearing after notice being given
                  to the Attorney-General and the Secretary of State for
                  Justice, following which the parties (including any
                  authorised interveners) must seek to agree issues and
                  proposed procedure, and the Court will then give
                  directions.

          LORD CARNWATH

  50. This judgment is directed principally to the first main issue
      identified by Lord Neuberger: the liability of the "landlords" in
      nuisance. I shall comment briefly at the end on the costs issue. On
      all other matters covered by Lord Neuberger's judgment, I agree with
      him and have nothing to add.

          The authorities

  51. Like Lord Neuberger (para 11) I would start from Lord Millett's
      summary of the law in Southwark London Borough Council v Mills 
      [2001] 1 AC 1, 22A, in particular that in order to be liable for
      authorising a nuisance, the landlords "must either participate
      directly in the commission of the nuisance, or they must be taken to
      have authorised it by letting the property" (emphasis added). In view
      of the limited discussion or findings of fact on this issue in the
      lower courts, this is not a suitable case for a detailed examination
      of the law. However, some brief comments on both alternatives may be
      helpful for future reference. It is convenient to deal first with the
      second.

          Authorising by letting

  52. I agree generally with Lord Neuberger's analysis of the authorities
      under this head, and the test which he extracts.

  53. One additional authority which might have assisted the judge, because
      of its helpful review of the authorities in a similar factual
      context, is Tetley v Chitty [1986] 1 All ER 663. A local council had
      granted planning permission to a go-kart club to develop a go-kart
      track on land owned by the authority, and had granted the club a
      seven year lease to use it for that express purpose. The council were
      held liable in nuisance for noise arising from the use of the track.
      It was common ground that they would not be relieved of potential
      liability by clauses in the lease obliging the club not to commit a
      nuisance.

  54. Having reviewed the authorities cited to him (which did not
      apparently include Malzy v Eichholz), the judge (McNeill J) accepted
      that it was not necessary to show that the nuisance was a "necessary
      consequence" of the use. He had mentioned among other authorities
      Smith v Scott [1973] Ch 314 (to which Lord Neuberger has referred),
      where the phrases "virtual certainty" or "a very high degree of
      probability" had been used. Possible alternative tests, on which he
      found it unnecessary to express a concluded view, were whether the
      use was "likely to cause a nuisance", or was "the foreseeable result"
      of the decision to permit the use for go-karting. It was enough that,
      on the facts of this case, the nuisance was "an ordinary and
      necessary consequence" or "a natural and necessary consequence" of
      the use (expressions used in two of the older cases), and that there
      was accordingly "express or implied consent to do that which on the
      facts here inevitably would amount to a nuisance" (pp 670-671).

  55. Reference might also have been made to authorities from other common
      law jurisdictions which have adopted the same principles. A close
      parallel on the facts is the judgment of the Ontario Supreme Court in
      Banfai v Formula Fun Centre Inc [1984] OJ No 3444, 34 CCLT 171(HCJ), 
      1984 CanLII 2198 <http://canlii.ca/t/g1270> . The court held that the
      owner, Hydro, was on the facts liable for nuisance caused by car race
      course run by its tenant because it arose from use in the way
      intended when the lease was granted. O'Leary J, adopting the approach
      of the English authorities as to the landlord exception (including
      Smith v Scott), said:

              "Hydro not only knew that Formula intended to use the land
              for an amusement ride, it knew and approved of the layout of
              the track. It knew the size, power and make of the cars to be
              raced thereon and the hours of the day the track would be in
              operation.

              … the nuisance resulted from Formula operating the track,
              that is to say, using the land exactly as Hydro knew it
              intended to use it. By entering into the lease, Hydro
              authorized Formula to use the land in the manner that caused
              a nuisance. It follows that the nuisance was 'the natural and
              necessary result of what the landlord authorized the tenant
              to do'…" (paras 44-48)

      It is of interest that the landlord was held liable even though there
      seems to have been no finding that it knew or should have known that
      a nuisance was likely to result from the permitted activity. It was
      enough that he was aware of the relevant aspects of the intended
      activity, from which, as found by the court, nuisance had resulted.

  56. I agree, however, with Lord Neuberger that, on the limited findings
      of fact made by the judge in this case, it is not possible to hold
      the landlords liable on the ground that nuisance was a "necessary" or
      "highly probable" consequence of the lettings. The less stringent
      tests suggested by the judge in Tetley v Chitty ("likely",
      "foreseeable") do not seem to be supported by earlier or later
      authority. I would reject them as insufficiently rigorous for a case
      where the sole basis for attributing responsibility to the landlord
      lies in the terms and circumstances of the grant of the lease.

          Participation

  57. I agree accordingly with Lord Neuberger that the case for the
      landlords' liability stands or falls on the issue of participation,
      in the sense used in Malzy v Eichholz. In Malzy itself, the landlord
      was held not liable for nuisance caused by the activities of his
      tenant, because the evidence showed no more than that, with knowledge
      of the offending use, he had continued to accept rent and had not
      taken any steps under the lease to bring it to an end. As Lord
      Cozens-Hardy MR explained (following Lord Collins MR in an unreported
      case):

              "There must be something much more than that. There must be
              something which can fairly amount to his doing the act
              complained of or allowing the act complained of, either by
              actual participation by himself or his agents or by what Lord
              Collins called active participation in that which was
              complained of." (p 315)

      Unfortunately, very little help is to be gained from the English
      authorities as to the practical application of this test, in
      circumstances where the landlord's involvement in his tenant's
      activities goes beyond mere receipt of rent and failure to intervene,
      as in that case.

  58. Again some help might have been gained from other common law
      jurisdictions. A similar concept is found, for example, in the
      American Restatement. In Harms v. City of Sibley 702 N.W.2d 91 (Iowa
      2005) pp 104-5, the Supreme Court of Iowa held (applying the American
      Restatement (Second) of Torts (1979), sections 834, 837) that a
      lessor may be liable if at the time of the lease he consents to the
      activity and "he then knows or should know that it will necessarily
      involve or is already causing the nuisance" or if he "participates to
      a substantial extent in carrying it on.". On the facts of that case
      the landlord of a ready-mix plant site was held jointly liable with
      his tenant for a nuisance caused by the plant, where the evidence
      showed that the landlord had purchased the property with the intent
      of building a ready-mix plant, had obtained a building permit for
      that purposed, and was president of the ready-mix company which
      operated the plant. In reaching this conclusion, as I understand the
      judgment, that court did not draw a clear distinction between the two
      parts of the test, relying both on the landlord's state of knowledge
      at the time of the lease and his "personal involvement in the
      property" both before and after.

  59. Even in the absence of direct authority, I see nothing in Lord
      Millett's formulation which requires a rigid division between the two
      parts of the test. The terms and circumstances of the lease, and the
      history, may be relevant in considering the significance of the
      landlord's conduct thereafter. "Participation" is not a term of art
      nor a precise definition. What is required in my view is a broad,
      common-sense judgment, based on the facts as a whole, as to whether
      there was such active involvement by the landlord in the offending
      activities as to make him jointly responsible in law for their
      consequences.

  60. We are concerned directly with the period from April 2006, when the
      claimants began to complain of nuisance, having acquired their house
      in January of that year. However, in considering the position of the
      landlords it is unrealistic in my view to ignore the earlier history.
      As far as concerns the stadium, Terence Waters had been the owner of
      the stadium since it was constructed by him in 1975 until August
      2005, when he sold to his son James. The 1985 planning permission for
      continuation of speedway racing, which is still operative, was and
      remains personal to him.

  61. In September 2005, James granted a lease to a Mr Harris (not a party)
      which lasted until its surrender in January 2008. During that time
      the business at the Stadium was operated under an arrangement with Mr
      Harris by David Coventry (2nd defendant, trading as RDC Promotions),
      whose own involvement with the stadium had started in 1993 (judgment
      para 16). We were told that the application to extend the stadium
      facilities in 2006 was in James' name. In January 2008 James, in the
      judge's words (para 28), "tried to revive the commercial activities
      at the stadium", before selling it to RDC Promotions in April 2008.
      They have owned and operated it ever since. However, James continued
      to take the lead in negotiations with the authorities, and it seems
      that the appeal against the abatement notice served in 2007 was in
      his name.

  62. The moto-cross track was also developed initially by Terence Waters
      under a 1992 temporary permission personal to him (and a Mr Nunn).
      Permanent permission was granted in 2002, this time personal to
      Terence Waters and Moto-land UK Ltd (the 3rd defendant) to whom Mr
      Waters and his co-owners granted a 10 year lease in September 2003.

  63. This history shows a close involvement by Mr Terence Waters, and
      later his son, in the activities of the stadium and the track dating
      back to their inception. Although the precise legal basis of their
      involvement has varied over the years, their central role in the
      enterprise has not. It is against that background in my view that the
      issue of "participation" in the relevant period must be judged.

  64. Lord Neuberger (para 21) has summarised the factors on which the
      claimants rely in the present case. I do not understand there to be
      any material dispute about the factual allegations; the dispute is as
      to their significance in law. In my view they show clearly that the
      involvement of Terence and James Waters has gone far beyond the
      ordinary role of a landlord protecting and enforcing his interests
      under a lease. It has involved active encouragement of the tenants'
      use and direct participation in the measures and negotiations to
      enable it to be continued. That these measures were directed in part
      to mitigating the problem does not alter the fact of participation
      nor the consequences for the landlord when the measures proved
      ineffective. It may be, as Lord Neuberger suggests, that they were
      motivated at least in part by their concurrent interests as
      freeholders, or even, in Terence's case, as local councillor. But
      under the Malzy test, as I understand it, the issue is not why they
      participated, but whether they did so, and with what effect.

  65. James's involvement is more recent than that of his father, and there
      is a lack of evidence about the precise extent of his involvement in
      the activities at the stadium before and since the period of his
      direct occupation in early 2008. However, it seems clear that he took
      a leading role in the negotiations with the authority to allow the
      use to continue at its existing level, and in the appeal against the
      abatement notice, though not served on him. On the material available
      to us, there is no reason to treat him as a less active participant
      than his father.

  66. For these reasons, in respectful disagreement with Lord Neuberger, I
      would allow the appeal on this issue, and hold that Terence and James
      Waters are jointly liable for the nuisance.

          Costs

  67. I understand that the majority of this court supports Lord
      Neuberger's view that consideration of this aspect should be
      adjourned for further hearing, following notice to the
      Attorney-General and Secretary of State. In those circumstances I
      prefer to express no view at this stage on the substantive issues,
      save that I agree with him (para 48) that the Aarhus Convention is of
      no help to the respondents for the reasons he gives.

          LORD MANCE

  68. I agree with Lord Neuberger's judgment on all issues, save that
      concerning the liability of the Third and Fourth Respondents, Messrs
      Terence and James Waters, as "landlords" in nuisance, discussed by
      Lord Neuberger in his paras 10 to 31 and by Lord Carnwath in his
      paras 52 to 67.

  69. On that issue, I find myself in sympathy with Lord Carnwath's
      reasoning and conclusion.

  70. I am fortified in this by the course this litigation has taken with
      regard to the Third and Fourth Respondents' liability. Lord Neuberger
      says in para 10 that "At trial, the landlords do not seem to have
      made much of the argument that they were in a different position"
      from the other defendants at trial. That appears an understatement.

  71. All the defendants were represented at trial by the same counsel
      (though not the same solicitor), and no suggestion at all was made in
      their opening or closing written submissions that, if there was a
      nuisance, the Third and Fourth Respondents were not liable for its
      commission in common with the other defendants held liable in
      nuisance.

  72. The only point made was that, assuming there was a nuisance, any
      damages awarded should not in the case of the Third and Fourth
      Respondents include exemplary and aggravated damages (but should be
      confined to ordinary damages): see especially para 53 of their
      opening submissions and paras 111 to 166 of their closing
      submissions.

  73. As explained in counsels' submissions before us, it appears to have
      been the judge who, effectively of his own motion, raised at a very
      late stage a possible distinction between the Third and Fourth
      Respondents and other defendants as regards liability for any
      nuisance. According to para 22 of his judgment, a point to this
      effect seems to have been explored with counsel in the Appellants
      final oral submissions, and, in paras 22 to 25 of his judgment, the
      judge then picked the point up, deciding that the Third and Fourth
      Respondents had no liability because of the terms of the leases. In
      doing this, he not only misread one of them, as Lord Neuberger points
      out in his para 16, but also overlooked the principle that a landlord
      who "participates" in a nuisance may be liable, irrespective of the
      terms of the lease.

  74. The Court of Appeal judgment is of equally little assistance on the
      present issue, since the Court concluded that there was no nuisance
      at all and so did not need to consider any question about the Third
      and Fourth Respondents' liability.

  75. The fact that the Third and Fourth Respondents were prepared to
      recognise their liability along with other defendants for any
      nuisance which existed, while denying that it extended to liability
      for exemplary or aggravated damages, appears to me not insignificant,
      when the question is whether they sufficiently participated in the
      nuisance for it to be appropriate to hold them liable for it. They
      and their counsel are likely to have had a much better feel for the
      reality of what was going on than we can have. But it also appears to
      me consistent with the facts and matters relied upon of which we are
      aware, and on which the Appellants place reliance in this connection.