          Summary


          Hilary Term
          [2012] UKSC 10
          On appeal from: [2011] EWCA Civ 1385


          JUDGMENT

              In the matter of S (a Child)

          before

          Lord Phillips, President
          Lady Hale
          Lord Mance
          Lord Kerr
          Lord Wilson

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          14 March 2012

          Heard on 20 February 2012


           

      Appellant
      James Turner QC
      Geraldine More O'Ferrall
      (Instructed by Rosleys Solicitors) 	  	Respondent
      Anthony Kirk QC
      Nicholas Anderson
      (Instructed by Lyons Davidson)
        	  	 
      Intervener (Reunite International Child Abduction Centre)
      Henry Setright QC
      Edward Devereux
      (Instructed by Dawson Cornwell) 	  	 

          LORD WILSON (DELIVERING THE JUDGMENT OF THE COURT)

          A: INTRODUCTION

   1. A mother appeals against an order of the Court of Appeal (Thorpe,
      Longmore and McFarlane LJJ), [2011] EWCA Civ 1385, dated 14 December
      2011, that she should forthwith return her son, WS (whom I will call
      W), and who was born on 13 November 2009 so is aged two, to
      Australia. The order was made pursuant to article 12 of the
      Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
      signed at The Hague on 25 October 1980 ("the Convention") and to
      section 1(2) of the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985 which gives
      the Convention the force of law.

   2. In making its order the Court of Appeal set aside an order of Charles
      J, made in the High Court, Family Division, [2011] EWHC 2624 (Fam),
      dated 30 August 2011, that the application of W's father for an order
      for his return forthwith to Australia pursuant to the Convention
      should be dismissed.

   3. In this court the mother is therefore the appellant and the father is
      the respondent. But there is now also an Intervener, namely Reunite
      International Child Abduction Centre ("Reunite").

   4. The mother and father have not been married. The mother is British
      but now also has Australian citizenship. The father is Australian.
      They lived with W in Sydney until, on 2 February 2011, the mother
      removed W to England, specifically to the home of her mother, where
      they have since remained. So Australia was the state in which W was
      habitually resident immediately prior to his removal. In removing W
      from Australia the mother lacked both the father's consent and the
      permission of an Australian court. In such circumstances her removal
      of W was in breach of rights of custody attributed to the father in
      relation to him under Australian law and it was therefore wrongful
      for the purpose of article 3 of the Convention.

   5. The only defence raised by the mother to the father's application for
      an order for the summary return of W to Australia under the
      Convention was that provided by article 13(b) of it, namely that:

              "there is a grave risk that his ... return would expose the
              child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place
              the child in an intolerable situation."

      Statistics published by the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference
      on Private International Law indicate that article 13(b) provides the
      defence against an order for summary return which succeeds more often
      than any other: see "A Statistical Analysis of Applications made in
      2008 under the 1980 Hague Convention", Lowe and Stephens, Cardiff Law
      School/The Permanent Bureau. Technically the establishment by a
      respondent of the grave risk identified in article 13(b) confers upon
      the court only a discretion not to order the child's return. In
      reality, however, it is impossible to conceive of circumstances in
      which, once such a risk is found to exist, it would be a legitimate
      exercise of the discretion nevertheless to order the child's return:
      see In re D (A Child) (Abduction: Rights of Custody) [2006] UKHL 51, 
      [2007] 1 AC 619, para 55 (Baroness Hale).

   6. Nine months ago, in In re E (Children) (Abduction: Custody Appeal) 
      [2011] UKSC 27, [2012] 1 AC 144, this court delivered a judgment in
      which it attempted to set out in clear terms the proper approach to a
      defence under article 13(b). It held, at paras 31 and 52, that the
      terms of the article were plain; that they needed neither elaboration
      nor gloss; and that, by themselves, they demonstrated the restricted
      availability of the defence. The court did not expect so soon to
      entertain a second appeal about the effect of article 13(b). It
      granted permission for the bringing of the present appeal largely out
      of provisional concern that, by the judgment delivered by Thorpe LJ
      (with which Longmore and McFarlane LJJ agreed), the Court of Appeal
      had expressed what it called "the crucial question" in terms which
      arguably represented not only a fresh gloss on the meaning of the
      article but one which happened to run directly counter to this
      court's analysis of its meaning in In Re E. Following announcement of
      this court's grant to the mother of permission to appeal, Reunite
      made its application for permission to intervene. In explaining the
      basis of its application, Reunite expressed identical concern about
      the Court of Appeal's formulation of "the crucial question"; and it
      postulated the risk of confusion about the proper approach to a
      defence under article 13(b) in the absence of clarification by this
      court.

          B: THE CONDUCT OF THE PARTIES

   7. In her evidence, which, in that Charles J did not receive oral
      evidence, was only in writing, the mother sought to explain in great
      detail why, as she alleged, her life with the father in Sydney had
      become so intolerable that on 2 February 2011 she had returned, with
      W, to her country of origin. In doing so she made a large number of
      serious allegations against the father; but she linked her
      allegations against the father with important evidence about the
      state of her psychological health while she had been living in
      Australia. One of the unfortunate features of the proceedings in the
      Court of Appeal seems to this court to have been an erroneous
      assumption that the mother's allegations against the father were in
      effect entirely disputed and thus that, in the absence of oral
      evidence, an assessment of their truth had lain beyond the judge's
      reach. In fact, however, the careful study by Charles J of the
      witness statements, and in particular of about 300 text messages and
      emails passing between the parents from January until June 2011,
      which were attached to them, revealed that a number of important
      allegations made by the mother against the father were admitted or at
      least, in the light of what he had said in the texts and emails,
      could not, as his counsel had conceded, realistically be denied.

   8. It was in 2005 that, with her British husband, the mother had gone to
      live in Australia. They were both nurses; indeed the mother has
      specialist qualifications in cancer and palliative care. They had no
      children; separated in 2007; and were divorced in Australia in 2008.
      In October 2008 the mother began her cohabitation with the father.

   9. It is agreed that, at an early stage in their relationship, the
      father informed the mother that between 1994 and 1998 he had been a
      heroin addict and had contracted Hepatitis C. Unfortunately the
      beginning of their relationship, and of the mother's pregnancy in
      February 2009, was a period of impending financial disaster for the
      father; and in May 2009 his import business finally collapsed with
      massive debts. Indeed the father's mother had offered her house as
      security for the debts and ultimately, a few months after the
      mother's departure, his mother reluctantly accepted the need for her
      house to be sold; she now occupies rented accommodation. Following
      the collapse of his business the father found poorly paid work as an
      estate agent. From then onwards he contributed little to the parents'
      finances and the burden of meeting their household expenditure fell
      largely on the mother who, other than for several months following
      W's birth, was working as a specialist clinical nurse in Sydney. But
      the parties got into debt; and the mother still remains liable to an
      Australian bank in a sum equal to about £8000.

  10. It is agreed that the father's grave financial problems led to
      serious alcohol and drug relapses on his part during the two years
      from early in 2009 until the mother's departure. The extent of his
      relapses is formally in issue but his emails to the mother impel a
      conclusion that his formal admission in a witness statement of
      alcohol abuse only on several occasions and of use of cocaine only on
      three occasions during that period is far from frank.

  11. The texts and emails begin in January 2011 when the relationship
      between the parents was breaking down. The father's messages to the
      mother on 13 January 2011 to "get fucked, bitch" and "I'll ... belt
      ya" were sent when, in fairness to him, he may not have been fully in
      control of his faculties. On the following day he wrote that he had
      made terrible mistakes. On 18 January he offered to submit to
      drug-testing. On any view the evening of 19 January was a crucial day
      in the breakdown. The mother contends that she found the father
      injecting himself in the car in their garage and that such was the
      reason why, as is agreed, she called the police and told him not to
      enter their flat again. The father admits only that he had been out
      drinking that day. But, in some of his 14 texts sent to the mother
      that day, the father offered to go to meetings of Alcoholics
      Anonymous and/or Narcotics Anonymous every night if necessary;
      pleaded for another chance; asked for forgiveness and threatened to
      kill himself. A month later, from England, the mother wrote to the
      father:

              "Those last few weeks in Sydney were literally hell. I was
              terrified and devastated as well as penniless. You left me
              with not even enough money to buy nappies for [W]... But you
              managed to get cash from your credit cards to buy drugs...
              Even the birth of your son was never enough to stop you
              drinking and using drugs... That night I found you using in
              the garage you could have come upstairs and done anything to
              us – that is why I called the police. [W] deserves to be safe
              and so do I."

      The father's reply was:

              "I understand all that but I still need my family and my son
              needs his father."

  12. On 27 January 2011 the Australian police obtained on the mother's
      behalf, without formal notice to the father, an Apprehended Violence
      Order in the local court. It is analogous to our non-molestation
      order. On 30 January they served it on the father and, during the
      following three days until the mother's departure, he was not in
      significant breach of it.

  13. In addition to the incontrovertible evidence before Charles J about
      the father's substantial descent into abuse and his inability to make
      a proper financial contribution to the family, there were allegations
      by the mother of occasions of serious violence on the part of the
      father towards her (including a threat to kill her) and
      counter-allegations of violence on her part towards him.

  14. The text and email traffic between February and June 2011
      demonstrated to Charles J not only how hurt the mother had been by
      the collapse of her relationship with the father but how desolate he
      had been as a result of the mother's removal, with W, to England.
      Although it was inappropriate – as well as impossible - for the judge
      to make any assessment of his qualities as a parent, the father's
      love for W as well as for the mother and his pain at their loss were
      manifest. On 26 May 2011 he told the mother that he had driven to The
      Gap, which is Sydney's equivalent of our Beachy Head, and had come as
      close as ever to committing suicide; and, in evidence, he confirmed
      that he had indeed genuinely contemplated suicide. Understandably the
      father also demonstrated anger. On 27 June, following receipt of the
      mother's first witness statement, he wrote to her that he was
      constantly on the edge of a nervous breakdown. He also wrote:

              "Who are you to decide that I am no longer eligible to be in
              [W's] life. I hate you. You are evil. I want a court-ordered
              mental health assessment for you when you're back. I don't
              want you hurting my son. Awful despicable evil person."

  15. Also before Charles J were numerous emails to the mother from the
      father's father, his mother and his sister, and copies to her of
      emails from them to the father himself, all sent during the months
      following the mother's departure. They expressed unequivocal sympathy
      for the mother's plight in Australia in the light of the father's
      condition and at length lamented his renewed descent into addiction.
      When, however, the mother attached their emails to a witness
      statement, the father's mother and sister signed statements in which
      they protested that she had substantially misled them about the
      extent of his problems.

          C: THE MOTHER'S PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH

  16. The mother put before Charles J letters from Dr McGrath, her GP in
      Sydney. Dr McGrath wrote that the mother had been her patient since
      January 2007; that she had then prescribed anti-depressant medication
      in order to combat the mother's anxiety and depression related to
      separation from her husband; that the mother had continued to take
      the medication until (as the mother was to clarify in her evidence)
      she became pregnant in February 2009; that she had seen the mother on
      24 January 2011 when she was tearful and agitated; and that, in the
      light of the mother's depression, which in her opinion might easily
      recur in a stressful situation, she considered that her health would
      suffer greatly if she was required to return to Australia.

  17. But the mother put in further medical evidence of a feature which is
      highly unusual in applications under the Convention. It was to the
      effect that the mother had had extensive psychotherapy in Australia.
      The evidence, in the form of a report by Ms MacKenzie, a
      psychologist, was that, from June 2010, she had seen the mother
      face-to-face on eleven occasions in order to address her chronic
      anxiety symptoms and to offer her cognitive behavioural therapy and
      supportive interpersonal therapy; and that, following the mother's
      removal to England, she had conducted nine further sessions of
      counselling with her by telephone.

  18. Charles J was understandably critical of Ms MacKenzie for stating as
      facts the allegations about the father which the mother had made to
      her and indeed for venturing even a provisional clinical opinion
      about him. But Ms MacKenzie's professional conclusions about the
      mother, born of extensive attendance upon her, remained of great
      relevance. She wrote that, from childhood, the mother had had an
      underlying and chronic anxiety condition; that she was subject to
      panic attacks; that she had seen the mother unravel; that the
      mother's affect of fear overwhelmed her; that fear of the father's
      mental instability, added to the stress of isolation in Australia
      from her family, might well undermine the mother's capacity to hold
      herself together; that her likely clinical depression could diminish
      her secure attachment to W; and that, in that (so Ms MacKenzie said)
      the father was capable of being impulsive and dangerous towards her,
      the mother would be in a constant state of hypervigilance, this being
      the very condition which would trigger an anxiety state. Ms MacKenzie
      wrote:

              "Should [the mother] be forced to return to Australia, I am
              concerned her anxiety will become crippling."

  19. There was to be still more evidence about the mother's psychological
      health: see para 25.

          D: THE PRELIMINARY ISSUE

  20. In In re E this court said:

              "36. There is obviously a tension between the inability of
              the court to resolve factual disputes between the parties and
              the risks that the child will face if the allegations are in
              fact true. [Counsel] submits that there is a sensible and
              pragmatic solution. Where allegations of domestic abuse are
              made, the court should first ask whether, if they are true,
              there would be a grave risk that the child would be exposed
              to physical or psychological harm or otherwise placed in an
              intolerable situation. If so, the court must then ask how the
              child can be protected against the risk. The appropriate
              protective measures and their efficacy will obviously vary
              from case to case and from country to country... Without such
              protective measures the court may have no option but to do
              the best it can to resolve the disputed issues."

  21. Among directions given by consent on 30 June 2011 in the father's
      application for an order under the Convention, issued 15 days
      earlier, Coleridge J appointed a hearing on 27 July 2011

              "(a) for consideration of whether, taken at their highest,
              the allegations made by the mother would come within the
              article 13(b) exception having regard to the proposed
              undertakings/protective measures;

              (b) ...

              (c) subject to the court's conclusion as to (a)... above,
              [for] summary disposal or directions to enable a further
              hearing with such oral evidence as the court considers
              appropriate to take place."

  22. At first sight the direction appears to be a reasonable attempt by
      counsel, endorsed by Coleridge J, to follow the guidance set by this
      court in In re E. It met, however, with criticism both by Charles J
      and, in arrestingly vehement terms, by Thorpe LJ, who observed that
      it had "bedevilled" the hearing before Charles J and that, if a
      practice of making such a direction had arisen, it should be
      "immediately stifled". Although this court is less clear that the
      direction had any such dramatic ill-effects, it accepts that, for two
      reasons, to both of which Charles J referred, it would have been
      better for the direction not to have been given. First, at a general
      level, the approach commended in In re E should form part of the
      court's general process of reasoning in its appraisal of a defence
      under the article and does not require formal identification as a
      preliminary point. Second, and more importantly, the guidance given
      in para 36 of In re E relates to factual "disputes" and to resolution
      of the "disputed" issues. At the time of the hearing before Coleridge
      J, prior – among other things - to the adduction by the mother of any
      medical evidence, counsel may well have supposed that all the
      material to be relied on by the mother in aid of her defence would be
      disputed. Such a supposition may have endured long after the
      invalidity of it should have been recognised; and, as we will
      demonstrate, it seems to have lulled even the Court of Appeal into
      considering the defence as resting merely on disputed allegations by
      the mother, albeit as countered, in its view, by adequate protective
      measures offered by the father.

          E: THE FURTHER EVIDENCE

  23. On 28 July 2011 Charles J adjourned the hearing until 30 August 2011.
      He did so because he considered that in two respects he needed
      further evidence. The first was a more detailed presentation by the
      father of the "practical and financial safeguards which would be
      available to the mother and [W] in the event of their return to
      Australia". The second was a report by a psychiatrist, to be
      instructed by both parties, upon:

              "(i) the mother's current psychiatric or psychological
              condition;

              (ii) the psychiatric or psychological impact on the mother of
              a return to Australia;

              (iii) what if any protective measures, such as psychological
              interventions, accommodation the address of which was unknown
              to the father, support from the mother's close family, or any
              other measure, would it be necessary to put in place to
              safeguard the effect on the mother's mental health of a
              return to Australia?"

  24. At the adjourned hearing on 30 August 2011 the father duly put
      forward, by undertakings, a comprehensive raft of measures suggested
      to be protective of the mother and W in the event of a return to
      Australia. He undertook to pay for their flights and, in advance of
      their return, to deposit a sum which would cover the rent of their
      reasonable accommodation for two months. Additionally, until an
      Australian court should otherwise order, he undertook

              (a) to make a specified contribution towards their further
              rent and by way of periodical payments for W;

              (b) to comply with the terms of the Apprehended Violence
              Order, which had been expressed to continue until 27 January
              2012;

              (c) not to remove W from the mother's care save for the
              purpose of any agreed contact with him;

              (d) not to approach within 250 metres of their accommodation
              save as might be agreed in writing for the purpose of any
              contact with W; and

              (e) not to seek to contact the mother save through lawyers.

      The father further undertook to lodge a signed copy of his
      undertakings with his local family court in advance of the return of
      the mother and W.

  25. The jointly instructed psychiatrist was Dr Kampers who interviewed
      the mother and wrote a report dated 10 August 2011. He suggested
      that, on the basis of the written evidence and of the long history
      which the mother gave him orally, much of which he set out, the
      mother had, when in Australia, suffered Battered Women's Syndrome,
      being a form of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, followed, after 19
      January 2011, by an acute stress reaction. His report on the first
      point identified in the order of Charles J was as follows:

              "[The mother's] current psychiatric and psychological
              condition is stable and healthy and she does not display any
              current features of depression, nor of Post-Traumatic Stress
              Disorder. Her symptoms of acute stress have resolved."

      His report on the second point identified in the order was as
      follows:

              "The likely psychiatric and psychological impact on [the
              mother] of a return to Australia is significant and severe.
              The source of her stress ([the father]) is in Australia.
              Contact with this source of stress (re-exposure to [him])
              puts her at risk for further Acute Stress and Post-Traumatic
              Stress. She has a prior history of anxiety and depression
              which not only lowers her threshold for acute stress and
              Post-Traumatic Stress but also increases the likelihood of a
              recurrence of her anxiety and depression."

  26. The case has proceeded on the basis that Dr Kampers failed to address
      the question which represented the third point identified in the
      judge's order. We are not convinced, however, that he failed to do
      so. For, following his reports on the first and second points, he
      referred to the need for a partner's abuser to undergo specialised
      counselling; observed that, given that both alcohol and drug
      addictions figured in his history, the father should also be treated
      for them; and concluded by saying "the most protective measure would
      be psychological intervention for the father, as detailed". We think
      therefore that there are grounds for concluding that Dr Kampers'
      answer to the judge's question about necessary "protective measures
      such as psychological interventions..." was that it was necessary for
      the father to get treatment. We accept, however, that Dr Kampers
      could more clearly have addressed the question. Following receipt of
      the report, neither side asked him to clarify his answer to it;
      indeed they joined in telling him that he was no longer required to
      attend the adjourned hearing. The decision on behalf of the father
      not to ask him to clarify his answer was tactical; and the decision
      on behalf of the mother was at any rate partly tactical. Each was
      apparently fearful of collecting an unhelpful response. But the
      burden of establishing her defence rested upon the mother; and her
      advisers were – perhaps – taking a substantial risk in choosing not
      to ask Dr Kampers to do so. The parties might also have anticipated
      that, at the adjourned hearing, Charles J would insist upon an
      immediate and clearer answer by Dr Kampers to his question, for
      example by email. In the event the judge did not insist on it but
      expressed regret about the absence of Dr Kampers from court.

          F: SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTIONS

  27. In In re E this court considered the situation in which the anxieties
      of a respondent mother about a return with the child to the state of
      habitual residence were not based upon objective risk to her but
      nevertheless were of such intensity as to be likely, in the event of
      a return, to destabilise her parenting of the child to the point at
      which the child's situation would become intolerable. No doubt a
      court will look very critically at an assertion of intense anxieties
      not based upon objective risk; and will, among other things, ask
      itself whether they can be dispelled. But in In re E it was this
      court's clear view that such anxieties could in principle found the
      defence. Thus, at para 34, it recorded, with approval, a concession
      by Mr Turner QC, who was counsel for the father in that case, that,
      if there was a grave risk that the child would be placed in an
      intolerable situation, "the source of it is irrelevant: eg, where a
      mother's subjective perception of events lead to a mental illness
      which could have intolerable consequences for the child".
      Furthermore, when, at para 49, the court turned its attention to the
      facts of that case, it said that it found "no reason to doubt that
      the risk to the mother's mental health, whether it be the result of
      objective reality or of the mother's subjective perception of
      reality, or a combination of the two, is very real".

  28. In the present proceedings considerable reference was made to the
      mother's subjective perceptions both of past events and – no doubt
      linked yet importantly different – of future risks. It began in the
      interlocutory judgment, [2011] EWHC 2625 (Fam), dated 28 July 2011,
      in which Charles J twice referred to the mother's "perception" of the
      father's attitude and likely reaction.

  29. In his substantive judgment dated 30 August 2011 Charles J sought
      faithfully to follow the guidance given by this court at para 36 of
      its judgment in In re E, set out in para 20 above. Thus

              (a) he began by assuming that the mother's allegations
              against the father were true;

              (b) he concluded that, on that assumption, and in the light
              of the fragility of the mother's psychological health, the
              protective measures offered by the father would not obviate
              the grave risk that, if returned to Australia, W would be
              placed in an intolerable situation; so

              (c) he proceeded to consider, as best he could in the light
              of the absence of oral evidence and the summary character of
              the inquiry, whether the mother's allegations were indeed
              true; and

              (d) following a careful appraisal of the documentary
              evidence, including the mass of emails between the parents,
              he concluded that, as counsel for the father had been
              constrained to acknowledge, the mother had "made out a good
              prima facie case that she was the victim of significant abuse
              at the hands of the father" (italics supplied).

      In the light of his conclusion at (d), which on any view was open to
      him, it seems to us that it was unnecessary for Charles J to have
      continued to address the mother's subjective perceptions. For the
      effect of his conclusion was that the mother's anxieties were based
      on objective reality. So it added nothing for him to refer, as in
      effect he did in three separate paragraphs of his substantive
      judgment, to the mother's "genuine conviction that she has been the
      victim of domestic abuse", by which he implied that she was convinced
      about something that might or might not be true.

  30. The only reference by the Court of Appeal to the history between the
      parents was in the judgment of Thorpe LJ as follows:

              "4. The parents' relationship was a stormy one and, on the
              mother's case, the father behaved very badly towards her. In
              January 2011 the mother called the police who took out an
              Apprehended Domestic Violence Order against the father on 27
              January."

      There was no reference in his judgment to:

              (a) the father's descent into alcohol abuse;

              (b) his descent back into drug abuse;

              (c) the absence of evidence that he had surmounted these
              problems;

              (d) the likely effect of them on his ability to comply with
              Australian court orders and, to which Charles J had referred,
              the possible need for the mother to take enforcement
              proceedings;

              (e) his contemplation of suicide;

              (f) his failure to maintain the family properly;

              (g) the likely effect of his failure on the ability of the
              Australian courts to devise a secure financial foundation for
              the household of the mother, with child care
              responsibilities, in Australia;

              (h) the many admissions made by the father in the texts and
              emails;

              (i) the judge's finding, on the necessarily provisional
              basis, that the mother had indeed been the victim of
              significant domestic abuse at the hands of the father; and

              (j) the fact, to which Charles J had also referred, that,
              however effective the steps to be taken by the Australian
              courts to protect the mother, she and the father would
              probably need to have a degree of personal communication for
              the purposes of his contact with W and of her likely
              application for permission to remove him back to England.

  31. Thus, with respect to them, the hard-pressed judges in the Court of
      Appeal made an entirely inadequate address of the mother's case.
      Instead they treated the foundation of her defence as being merely
      her subjective perception of risks which might lack any foundation in
      reality. Thus, in para 26 of his judgment, Thorpe LJ described the
      father's first ground of appeal as being that Charles J had erred in
      concluding that the effect of the judgment in In re E "was to raise
      the bar against applicants seeking a return order where the
      respondent relied on a subjective perception of the risks and
      consequences of return". We should add that Charles J had nowhere
      said that the effect of that judgment had been to "raise the bar" and
      we do not agree that it did so. Nor, for that matter, do we agree
      with the suggestion of Thorpe LJ in paras 34 and 36 that the judgment
      in In re E had been no more than a "restatement" of the law of the
      Convention: it was primarily an exercise in the removal from it of
      disfiguring excrescence. But, as we have shown in para 27 above, the
      court did recognise the possibility that a respondent's merely
      subjective perception of risks could, as a matter of logic, found the
      defence.

  32. Unfortunately in the present case the Court of Appeal found
      difficulty in accepting that part of the decision in In re E.

  33. Thus Thorpe LJ said:

              "43. Nor would I accept Mr Turner's submission that his
              recorded concession in paragraph 34 of the judgment in Re E
              is authoritive [sic] for the proposition that it is
              unnecessary for the court to weigh objective reality of
              asserted anxiety. The crucial question for the judge
              remained: were these asserted risk, insecurities and
              anxieties realistically and reasonably held in the face of
              the protective package the extent of which would commonly be
              defined not by the applicant but by the court?"

      And Thorpe LJ added:

              "49. This is a paradigm case for a return order to achieve
              the objectives of the Convention. Although Mr Turner asserts
              that the effect of a respondent's clearly subjective
              perception of risks on return leading to an intolerable
              situation for the child is a permissible ground for refusing
              a return order he has been able to cite no reported case with
              that characteristic."

  34. In the light of these passages we must make clear the effect of what
      this court said in In re E. The critical question is what will happen
      if, with the mother, the child is returned. If the court concludes
      that, on return, the mother will suffer such anxieties that their
      effect on her mental health will create a situation that is
      intolerable for the child, then the child should not be returned. It
      matters not whether the mother's anxieties will be reasonable or
      unreasonable. The extent to which there will, objectively, be good
      cause for the mother to be anxious on return will nevertheless be
      relevant to the court's assessment of the mother's mental state if
      the child is returned.

          G: CONCLUSION

  35. As we have explained, the Court of Appeal failed to appreciate that
      the mother's fears about the father's likely conduct rested on much
      more than disputed allegations. Equally it paid scant regard to the
      unusually powerful nature of the medical evidence about the mother,
      in particular of her receipt of regular psychotherapy while in
      Australia. This conferred an especial authority on Ms MacKenzie's
      report, of which the court scarcely made mention. Overarchingly,
      however, it failed to recognise that the judgement about the level of
      risk which was required to be made by article 13(b) was one which
      fell to be made by Charles J and that it should not overturn his
      judgement unless, whether by reference to the law or to the evidence,
      it had not been open to him to make it. Charles J was right to give
      central consideration to the interim protective measures offered by
      the father. But his judgement was that, in the light of the
      established history between the parents and of the mother's acute
      psychological frailty for which three professionals vouched, they did
      not obviate the grave risk to W. It must have been a difficult
      decision to reach but, in the view of this court, it was open to him
      to make that judgement; and so it was not open to the Court of Appeal
      to substitute its contrary view. The fact that Charles J had not
      received oral evidence did not deprive his judgment of its primacy in
      that sense. The decision of the House of Lords in In re J (A Child)
      (Custody Rights: Jurisdiction) [2005] UKHL 40, [2006] 1 AC 80,
      concerned the Court of Appeal's reversal of a judge's discretionary
      dismissal of an application under the Children Act 1989 for a
      specific issue order that a child be summarily returned to Saudi
      Arabia. Baroness Hale, with whose speech all the other members of the
      committee agreed, said:

              "12...Too ready an interference by the appellate court,
              particularly if it always seems to be in the direction of one
              result rather than the other, risks robbing the trial judge
              of the discretion entrusted to him by the law. In short, if
              trial judges are led to believe that, even if they direct
              themselves impeccably on the law, make findings of fact which
              are open to them on the evidence, and are careful, as this
              judge undoubtedly was, in their evaluation and weighing of
              the relevant factors, their decisions are liable to be
              overturned unless they reach a particular conclusion, they
              will come to believe that they do not in fact have any choice
              or discretion in the matter. On that ground alone... I would
              allow this appeal."

  36. This court allows the appeal and restores the order of Charles J.

          H: POSTSCRIPT

  37. In In re E this court addressed a decision of the Grand Chamber of
      the European Court of Human Rights ("the ECtHR") which it understood
      had caused widespread concern and even consternation about such
      approach to the determination of an application under the Hague
      Convention as was necessary in order to avoid infringement of the
      rights of the child and/or of the parents under article 8 of the
      European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
      Fundamental Freedoms. The decision was Neulinger and Shuruk v
      Switzerland [2011] 1 FLR 122. In particular, as this court pointed
      out at para 21 of its judgment in In re E, the Grand Chamber had
      suggested, at para 139, that article 8 required the court to which an
      application under the Hague Convention was made

              "[to conduct] an in-depth examination of the entire family
              situation and of a whole series of factors, in particular of
              a factual, emotional, psychological, material and medical
              nature, and [to make] a balanced and reasonable assessment of
              the respective interests of each person".

      In In re E, building on helpful comments about the decision which had
      been made extrajudicially by the then President of the ECtHR, this
      court stressed, at paras 22 to 27, that it had been the very object
      of the Hague Convention to avoid an in-depth examination of the
      child's future in the determination of an application for a summary
      order for return to the State of the child's habitual residence; that
      a properly careful determination of such an application did not
      equate to the in-depth examination described in para 139 of the
      judgment in the Neulinger case; that the reference to an in-depth
      examination should not be taken out of context and applied generally;
      and that it would be most unlikely that a proper application of the
      Hague Convention would infringe the rights of any members of the
      family under article 8.

  38. In the present appeal Reunite has drawn to this court's attention
      that on 13 December 2011, in X v Latvia (Application No.27853/09,
      BAILII: [2011] ECHR 2104 ), the ECtHR (Third Section) has
      unfortunately reiterated, at para 66, in terms identical to those in
      para 139 of the Neulinger case, the suggested requirement of an
      in-depth examination in the determination of applications under the
      Hague Convention. With the utmost respect to our colleagues in
      Strasbourg, we reiterate our conviction, as Reunite requests us to
      do, that neither the Hague Convention nor, surely, article 8 of the
      European Convention requires the court which determines an
      application under the former to conduct an in-depth examination of
      the sort described. Indeed it would be entirely inappropriate.