
           

      Hilary Term
      [2012] UKSC 7
      On appeal from: [2010] CSIH 15; [2007] CSOH 82


          JUDGMENT

              Anderson (Appellant) v Shetland Islands Council and another
              (Respondents)

          before

          Lord Hope, Deputy President
          Lord Kerr
          Lord Reed

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          29 February 2012

          LORD HOPE

   1. This is an appeal from an interlocutor of an Extra Division of the
      Court of Session of 16 February 2010. The respondents seek an order
      under Rule 36 (1) of the Supreme Court Rules 2009 that the appellant
      should be required to give security for their costs of the appeal.
      The first respondents, Shetland Islands Council, suggest that
      security should be given for their costs in the sum of £50,000. The
      second respondents, Scottish Water, suggest £40,000 as the amount
      that should be given as security in their case. In response to these
      applications the appellant, Mrs Patricia Anderson, seeks an order
      that each of the respondents lodge security for her costs in the sum
      of £5,000.

   2. With the agreement of the parties, we have considered these
      applications by way of written submissions. This was to minimise
      costs and because of the difficulties that would face Mrs Anderson,
      who is aged 93 and is a litigant in person, were she to be required
      to travel from Shetland to London for an oral hearing.

          Background

   3. The appeal is in respect of a petition which was presented to the
      Court of Session by Mrs Anderson in January 2007. She sought judicial
      review of what she claimed were omissions by the respondents in
      failing to implement and discharge their duties under statute in
      respect of drainage, sewerage and roads. Her complaint is that the
      stability of her house in Shetland has been undermined by an increase
      in surface run-off water emanating from land above her house. This is
      said to have been due to road improvement works carried out by the
      first respondents and to housing development works permitted by them
      for which the drainage is said to have been inadequate. Criticisms
      are also made of the drainage in the area for which the second
      respondents are said to be responsible. Among other remedies she
      seeks an award of damages against the respondents for losses she
      claims to have suffered as a result of their failure to perform their
      statutory duties. A more complete account of her allegations can be
      found in the opinion of the Extra Division which was delivered by
      Lord Hardie [2010] CSIH 15, paras 2-3.

   4. On 30 May 2008 the Lord Ordinary, Lord Matthews, dismissed the
      petition: [2007] CSOH 82. He held that Mrs Anderson's averments were
      irrelevant. She had not relevantly averred circumstances that would
      give her a title to sue under the statutory provisions to which she
      referred. Nor did her averments show that the respondents were in
      breach of their respective duties under the statutes or that they had
      in any way acted ultra vires. Mrs Anderson reclaimed, but the Extra
      Division refused her reclaiming motion and adhered to the
      interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary.

   5. It is clear from Lord Hardie's opinion that the judges of the Extra
      Division had some difficulty in making sense of Mrs Anderson's
      averments. But they were entirely satisfied that they were
      irrelevant. She had alleged a failure by the first respondents as
      planning authority to consult the second respondents as drainage
      authority, but they held that even if there had been such a failure
      that would not entitle her to an award of damages. Her case against
      the first respondents as drainage authority was fundamentally flawed,
      and for a variety of reasons her approach to possible remedies for
      alleged damage caused by the water discharged from their drain was
      wholly misconceived. As for her case against the second respondents,
      their obligations under the statute ceased when the surface water was
      discharged into the first respondents' drain. Her allegations that
      they failed in their statutory duties of inspection, maintenance and
      repair were irrelevant. She did not aver that any of their works had
      been damaged or affected by soil erosion, except in one respect which
      was not said to be relevant to the problem affecting her property.
      Her case against these respondents was essentially lacking in
      specification and was plainly irrelevant

   6. As Lord Hardie noted in para 4 of his opinion, Mrs Anderson decided
      while the hearing of her reclaiming motion was still pending to raise
      an action against the respondents in the Court of Session in which
      she sought an award of damages against them on the ground of
      nuisance. She also sought an order under section 46 of the Court of
      Session Act 1988 requiring them to perform such acts as might be
      necessary to prevent surface water run-off from the new houses being
      discharged into her property, and interdict against them from
      enabling water to be discharged onto it from a culvert attached to a
      roadside drain. This action mirrors her application for judicial
      review, in that she alleges in these proceedings too that the
      stability of her property has been undermined by an increase in the
      surface water emanating from land above it and seeks damages. Her
      action of damages for nuisance is still pending in the Court of
      Session.

   7. The appeal to this court has been brought under section 40(1)(a) of
      the Court of Session Act 1988. As the Extra Division's interlocutor
      was a final interlocutor Mrs Anderson did not require to be given
      leave to bring her appeal before this court. But she was required by
      Supreme Court Practice Direction 4.2.2 to have her notice of appeal
      certified as reasonable by two counsel from Scotland. She was unable
      to obtain these certificates. She asked the Dean of the Faculty of
      Advocates to assist her by nominating counsel to undertake this
      responsibility, but he declined to do so as he was of the opinion
      that her appeal could not be regarded as reasonable. Mrs Anderson
      then obtained opinions from two members of the Bar in England in
      which they said that her appeal had reasonable prospects of success.
      But their opinions did not satisfy the requirements of the practice
      direction. They were not from the relevant jurisdiction, and the
      grounds on which they based their opinions differed from those on
      which Mrs Anderson's case was argued in the Court of Session.

   8. Mrs Anderson submitted her notice of appeal on 11 April 2011. It was
      accompanied by opinions which had been provided by two members of the
      Scottish Bar. One of them was Mrs Anderson's son, Mr R N M Anderson.
      Although the notice of appeal had not been certified by them as
      reasonable as the practice direction requires the court permitted it
      to be received so that she could apply for legal aid, which she then
      did. By a letter dated 30 September 2011 she informed the court that
      her application for legal aid had been refused and that she had been
      told that there was no prospect of that decision being reconsidered.
      In that letter she also informed the court that the respondents had
      obtained awards of expenses against her which they had had taxed and
      extracted, that the amount of the taxed expenses was more than
      £120,000 and that this exceeded the value of her house. These awards
      were made by an interlocutor of the Extra Division of 18 March 2010
      and were in respect of the proceedings before the Lord Ordinary and
      in the Inner House. The first respondents say that the amount of
      their expenses as taxed is £53,465.60. The second respondents say
      that amount of the taxed expenses in their case is £40,359.60. The
      balance of the amount referred to by Mrs Anderson can be assumed to
      be attributable to an award of expenses that was made by that
      interlocutor in favour of Nicolson Brothers, who were an interested
      third party to her application for judicial review when it was in the
      Court of Session.

   9. Although the petition was presented and has been proceeding in the
      name of Mrs Anderson, the proceedings have in fact been conducted
      throughout on her behalf by her son, who is in possession of a power
      of attorney in his favour dated 16 July 2003. The pleadings were
      drafted by him, and he appeared as counsel on her behalf in the Outer
      House and in the Extra Division. No objection was taken at that
      stage. But when the damages action based on nuisance came before the
      Lord Ordinary, Lady Smith, for a hearing on the motion roll on 30
      September 2011 the respondents expressed their concern that Mr
      Anderson should be acting as counsel for the pursuer in circumstances
      where his instructions to do so emanated from himself under the power
      of attorney. Mr Anderson undertook to consult the Dean of Faculty as
      to whether it was proper for him to continue to represent the pursuer
      as her counsel. He was directed by the Dean to cease acting for her
      in that capacity. In an opinion which she delivered following the
      hearing Lady Smith said that she was satisfied that Mr Anderson's
      conduct in relation to the motions that were before her was
      unreasonable and obstructive. She also said that a proper critical
      independent appraisal of his mother's case did not appear to have
      taken place: [2011] CSOH 187, para 25.

          Rule 36(1)

  10. The rule in the House of Lords was that, unless the appellant was
      legally aided or the requirement was waived by the respondent, the
      appellant had to give security for costs in the sum fixed by the
      House, which latterly was £25,000: House of Lords Standing Order V
      (1); Practice Directions as to Civil Appeals, direction 10.1. When
      the appellate jurisdiction was transferred to the Supreme Court it
      was decided that the strict rule which applied in the House of Lords
      could operate as an obstacle to justice and that it should be
      departed from. The rule in the Supreme Court is that the making of an
      order for security for costs is at the discretion of the court. Rule
      36(1) of the Supreme Court Rules 2009 (SI 2009/1603 (L17)) provides:

              "The Court may on the application of a respondent order an
              appellant to give security for the costs of the appeal and
              any order for security shall determine –

                  (a) the amount of that security, and

                  (b) the manner in which, and the time within which,
                  security must be given."

      Orders for security under this rule will be made sparingly: Supreme
      Court Practice Direction 4.7.1.

  11. As this is an appeal from the Court of Session for which leave is not
      required, some assistance as to the circumstances in which it would
      be appropriate to order the giving of security under Rule 36(1) in
      such cases may be found in decisions of the Scottish courts about the
      finding of caution – the Scots word for security, derived from the
      expression "cautio" in Roman law. Maclaren on Expenses (1912), p 11
      states that the whole matter of caution is pre-eminently one of
      discretion. But, as the case law has developed, some principles as to
      how that discretion is to be exercised have come to be recognised. In 
      Ritchie v M'Intosh (1881) 8 R 747, 748 Lord Young said that absolute
      impecuniosity is never the sole reason for making such an order:

              "The conduct of the cause may be such, or other matters may
              transpire, which may make such an order necessary, but
              absolute impecuniosity will never be taken as the sole ground
              for making a party find caution for expenses."

      In Will v Sneddon Campbell & Munro 1931 SC 164, 171 Lord Hunter said:

              "It is well settled, no doubt, that, if a man is bankrupt and
              if he is divested of his estate, he is not entitled to sue an
              action unless he finds caution. But that is only a general
              rule; there are exceptions even to that. On the other hand,
              there is no general rule to the effect that, unless a man has
              been rendered bankrupt and his estates have been
              sequestrated, he cannot be ordained by the court to find
              caution. Even short of bankruptcy, I think there may be
              circumstances in which a pursuer might be ordained to find
              caution."

      In the same case at p 169 Lord Justice Clerk Alness said that the
      history of the litigation was an element which could be taken into
      consideration and that, while none of the considerations in that case
      might of itself have been sufficient, their cumulative effect seemed
      to him to justify the order.

  12. In Stevenson v Midlothian District Council 1983 SC (HL) 50 the
      pursuer was an undischarged bankrupt. The Lord Ordinary ordered him
      to find caution, although he was in receipt of legal aid. He said
      that he had had regard to the nature of the action and the pleadings,
      as well as to the fact that he was an undischarged bankrupt and had
      failed to pay the expenses awarded against him in a previous action.
      His decision was reclaimed to the Inner House where, as Lord Fraser
      of Tullybelton was later to observe at p 58 when the case reached the
      House of Lords, Lord President Emslie's comment at p 52 that by any
      standards it was an extraordinary action in which it was not
      immediately apparent that it had any merit erred only in being too
      restrained. The order for caution was affirmed in the Inner House,
      and the appeal to the House of Lords was dismissed. Lord Fraser
      endorsed all the factors that the Lord Ordinary had taken into
      account. Evidence of impecuniosity was relevant, as was unreasonable
      behaviour and the fact that the pleadings did not disclose any
      arguable case. In Rush v Fife Regional Council 1985 SLT 451 the
      sheriff's decision to order caution was upheld, having regard to the
      pursuer's conduct, the nature of his pleadings which were said to be
      hopelessly irrelevant and his failure to pay the expenses awarded
      against him in another action. Lord Justice Clerk Wheatley said at
      453:

              "Ordering caution on a man who is manifestly not in a
              financial position to provide any sum of substance may appear
              to be a draconian order, but justice has to be even handed,
              and on the other side of the coin it would be grossly unfair
              to oblige the defenders to carry on defending an obviously
              irrelevant action without any hope of recovering any expenses
              if successful, particularly against an adversary who has
              shown that he is prone to table all kinds of procedural
              motions which have no merit and no justification."

          Mrs Anderson's application

  13. Mrs Anderson's application that each of the respondents should be
      ordered to lodge security for her costs in the sum of £5,000 is
      entirely without merit. Rule 36 makes no provision for an application
      by an appellant that a respondent be ordered to give security for the
      costs of the appeal. Nor did the Standing Order in the House of
      Lords. This should come as no surprise. To require an impecunious
      respondent to find caution would be, in effect, to force him to
      acquiesce in the appeal against the judgment which was in his favour
      in the court below. As a general rule, not even a bankrupt defender
      is required to find caution for expenses: MacLaren on Expenses, p 16.
      Nor is a bankrupt defender who is unsuccessful in his defence and
      reclaims, or a defender who has become bankrupt pending his appeal: 
      Johnstone v Henderson (1906) 8 F 689; Ferguson v Leslie (1873) 11 SLR
      16. As Lord Kinnear said in Johnstone at p 690, a respondent who is
      in that situation is still entitled to say that the case should not
      be decided against him until he has been heard.

  14. But even if it were open to this court to make such an order, there
      are no grounds whatever for ordering the respondents to find security
      in this case. They are both public authorities. There is no question
      as to their ability to meet any order for costs that might be made
      against them. Nor has there been anything in their conduct of the
      case that suggests that they have been in any way obstructive or
      unreasonable. No responsible lawyer would have put his name to such
      an application. Recalling Lord Justice Clerk Wheatley's words in 
      Rush v Fife Regional Council at p 453, it has no merit and no
      justification.

          The respondents' applications

  15. The case for an order that Mrs Anderson should be ordered to give
      security for the respondents' costs of the appeal is, on the other
      hand, compelling. The considerations that support their application
      are these:

              (a) First, Mr Anderson has informed the court that the awards
              of expenses that have been made in the respondents' favour
              against his mother already exceed, after taxation, the value
              of her house which appears to be her principal asset. The
              respondents have not yet sought to enforce these awards. But
              there must be some doubt about her ability to satisfy them
              out of such means as may be at her disposal.

              (b) Second, this is an appeal that appears to be wholly
              without merit. Mrs Anderson has been unable to find two
              counsel in Scotland who are able and willing to say that it
              is reasonable, and she has been refused legal aid. Her son,
              by whom the proceedings are being conducted on Mrs Anderson's
              behalf, is incapable of providing her with independent legal
              advice. The notice of appeal that has been lodged on her
              behalf identifies the various statutory provisions on which
              she founds. But no attempt is made to answer the criticisms
              of her pleadings which formed the basis of the finding by the
              Extra Division that they were irrelevant.

              (c) Third, the decision of the Lord Ordinary that her
              averments are irrelevant has already been the subject of an
              appeal to the Inner House. Had leave been required for her
              appeal to this court, it would almost certainly have been
              refused on the ground that no reasonable grounds have been
              shown for her to be allowed a second appeal in a case which
              has failed below because of fundamental defects in the way it
              has been pleaded and raises no issue of general public
              importance.

              (d) Fourth, these proceedings can arguably be said to be an
              abuse of process. Mrs Anderson is at the same time pursuing
              an action on the grounds of nuisance in the same court which,
              if soundly based, will give her a remedy in damages which is
              the same as that which she is seeking in these proceedings.
              The respondents ought not to be burdened with having to
              respond to two sets of proceedings at her instance in which
              she is seeking the same remedy.

      Any one of these factors, on its own, might not have been enough. But
      the cumulative effect of these considerations more than justifies the
      order which the respondents seek, subject only to the amount of the
      security that should be ordered.

  16. The respondents say that, in addition to the taxed awards of expenses
      in their favour in the Court of Session, they have each incurred
      further expense in connection with the appeal to this court which
      amounts to approximately £13,000. They seek orders for the giving of
      security in the sums of £50,000 and £40,000 respectively. Their
      exposure to further expense in resisting this appeal will, of course,
      depend on the procedure that the court will need to adopt to deal
      with it. As Mrs Anderson lacks the assistance of counsel, she would
      have to appear personally to argue her own appeal. This would create
      serious problems for her in view of her age and the distance she
      would have to travel. It would be more satisfactory, and fairer to
      all concerned, if the court were to dispense with an oral hearing and
      deal with the appeal on paper. That would also have the advantage of
      keeping costs down to the minimum. It should be assumed for present
      purposes that this is the procedure that will be adopted.

  17. In all the circumstances we consider that a reasonable estimate the
      amount of the security for their costs that is required in the case
      of each respondent is £20,000.

          Conclusion

  18. Mrs Anderson's request that the respondents be ordered to give
      security for her costs is refused. The respondents' request that Mrs
      Anderson be ordered to give security for their costs is granted. The
      court orders her to give security in the amount of £20,000 for each
      respondent. This must be done by delivering a cheque to the Registrar
      within 28 days made payable to the UK Supreme Court Security Fund for
      the total sum of £40,000.