      Summary


      Trinity Term
      [2015] UKSC 50
      On appeal from: [2012] EWCA Civ 26


      JUDGMENT

      Coventry and others (Respondents) v Lawrence and another (Appellants)

      before

      Lord Neuberger, President
      Lady Hale, Deputy President
      Lord Mance
      Lord Clarke
      Lord Dyson
      Lord Sumption
      Lord Carnwath

      JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


      22 July 2015

      Heard on 9, 10 and 12 February 2015

      Appellants (Lawrence/Shields)
      Stephen Hockman QC
      Timothy Dutton QC
      William Upton
      Benjamin Williams
      (Instructed by Richard Buxton Environmental and Public Law) 	  	
      Respondent (David Coventry and Moto-Land UK Ltd)
      Robert McCracken QC
      Sebastian Kokelaar
      (Instructed by Pooley Bendall Watson)
        	  	 
        	  	Intervener (Secretary of State for Justice)
      Tom Weisselberg QC
      Jason Pobjoy
      (Instructed by Government Legal Department)
        	  	 
        	  	Intervener (Asbestos Victims Support Group Forum UK)
      Robert Weir QC
      Harry Steinberg
      Achas Burin
      (Instructed by Leigh Day)
        	  	 
        	  	Intervener (The General Bar Council)
      Nicholas Bacon QC
      Dr Mark Friston
      Greg Cox
      (Instructed by Colemans CTTS)
        	  	 
        	  	Intervener (The Law Society)
      Kieron Beal QC
      (Instructed by The Law Society)

      LORD NEUBERGER AND LORD DYSON: (with whom Lord Sumption and Lord
      Carnwath agree)

      The factual and procedural background

   1. This judgment is concerned with an attack on the compatibility with
      the European Convention on Human Rights ("the Convention") of the
      system for recovery of costs in civil litigation in England and Wales
      following the passing of the Access to Justice Act 1999 ("the 1999
      Act"). The proceedings to which it relates have been the subject of
      two previous judgments of this court – [2014] UKSC 13, [2014] AC 822 
      and [2014] UKSC 46, [2015] AC 106. The fact that this is the third
      judgment of this court in this case is an unfortunate irony, as the
      issue which has to be addressed arises from the contention that the
      order for costs made against the respondents at first instance
      infringed article 6 of, and/or article 1 of the First Protocol to,
      the Convention, and considerable further costs have been incurred
      since then.

   2. A detailed summary of the factual and procedural history is to be
      found in the first two judgments at [2014] AC 822, paras 2-27 and 
      [2015] AC 106, paras 1-4. So far as relevant for present purposes,
      and at the risk of over-simplification, the facts are as follows.

   3. The appellants, Katherine Lawrence and Raymond Shields, the owners of
      a residential bungalow in Mildenhall, Suffolk, brought proceedings
      for an injunction and damages based on the contention that the noise
      emanating from speedway and other motorsport activities, operated by
      David Coventry and Moto-Land UK Limited ("the respondents") on a
      stadium and track some 800 metres away, constituted a nuisance. After
      a trial lasting 11 days, HHJ Seymour QC, sitting as a Deputy High
      Court Judge, found in favour of the appellants, awarding them damages
      and an injunction limiting the level of noise emanating from the
      stadium and track, against the respondents. He also dismissed the
      claim in so far as it had been brought against the respondents'
      landlords ("the landlords").

   4. So far as the figures are concerned, the amount of damages awarded by
      the judge in favour of the appellants against the respondents was a
      total of £20,750; and, on the evidence, the value of the appellants'
      bungalow was under £400,000, and the maximum diminution in its value
      if the nuisance had continued (ie if no injunction had been granted)
      was £74,000.

   5. Of central relevance for current purposes, the judge also ordered the
      respondents to pay 60% of the appellant's costs as assessed on the
      standard basis. We now have fairly precise figures as to what that
      order means (subject to the points dealt with in paras 7 and 8
      below).

   6. The appellants' "base costs", that is the costs payable by the
      appellants to their lawyers on a conventional basis, in connection
      with the proceedings up to the time the judge made the order, were
      £307,642, of which the respondents would therefore be liable for 60%,
      ie £184,585. However, the appellants agreed with their lawyers that
      they would proceed on the basis that the lawyers would act under a
      conditional fee agreement, ie on a "no win no fee" basis. This meant
      that, as the appellants had won before the judge, they would be
      liable to pay (i) a success fee to their lawyers on top of the base
      costs, to compensate the lawyers for acting on a conditional fee
      agreement, and (ii) a so-called ATE premium, a premium to an
      insurance company in return for that insurance company having agreed
      to underwrite any liability which the appellants might have had for
      the respondents' costs if the respondents had won. The success fees
      amounted to £215,007, of which the respondents were liable for 60%,
      ie £129,004; the ATE premium appears to have been in the region of
      £305,000, of which the respondents were liable for 60%, ie about
      £183,000.

   7. The respondents accept that they cannot challenge their liability for
      the £184,585 on the ground that it infringes their Convention rights.
      However, Mr McCracken QC was understandably anxious to make it clear
      on their behalf that they would anticipate strongly challenging the
      appellants' right to recover that sum, on the sort of grounds on
      which a paying party is always entitled to seek to challenge the
      receiving party's bill of costs when assessed on the standard basis.
      Those grounds would be that the total sum is disproportionate, and in
      any event that the total sum includes items which it was not
      reasonable to have incurred at all, and that the sums incurred in
      connection with those items which were reasonably incurred were
      themselves unreasonable.

   8. However, in relation to the £129,004 and the £183,000, the
      respondents argue that it would infringe their rights under article 6
      of the Convention ("article 6") and/or article 1 of the First
      Protocol to the Convention ("A1P1") if they were liable for those
      sums, and that is the issue which we preliminarily considered in our
      second judgment and now have to deal with in this judgment. Again Mr
      McCracken was anxious to emphasise that, if his arguments based on
      article 6 and A1P1 fail, the respondents would wish to raise, to the
      extent which they properly can, the sort of arguments described in
      para 7 to challenge any liability to these two sums.

   9. In order to complete the history, the judge's decision on the
      substantive issue was reversed by the Court of Appeal, who decided
      that the respondents had not been guilty of nuisance. However, the
      appellants were successful in their appeal to this court, and,
      following our first decision, we reinstated Judge Seymour's order
      (albeit with modifications), including (subject to what we decide in
      this judgment) the direction that the respondents pay 60% of the
      appellants' costs of the proceedings up to and including his
      judgment. Our second judgment concerned the liability of the
      landlords for the respondents' nuisance, and, in paras 32-46, what
      were in the event preliminary observations on the respondents'
      contention that the extent of their liability for costs pursuant to
      Judge Seymour's order (as reinstated by this court) infringed article
      6 and/or A1P1. For the reasons given in paras 43-45, we did not feel
      it right to determine that issue until we had heard argument on the
      issue from the Secretary of State and any other appropriate
      intervener.

  10. The appellants' base costs in the Court of Appeal and the Supreme
      Court were, respectively, £103,457 and £204,226. The appellants'
      success fees were £71,770 in the Court of Appeal and £92,115 in the
      Supreme Court. The appellants' ATE premia were £70,141 in the Court
      of Appeal and £126,588 in the Supreme Court. It appears likely that
      the effect of the order we make following the two judgments which we
      have given is that the respondents will be liable for all, or a
      substantial proportion, of these sums, subject to the arguments
      discussed in paras 6 to 8 above, including in relation to the success
      fees and ATE premia the contention that any such liability would be
      contrary to article 6 and/or A1P1.

  11. The issue raised by the respondents based on article 6 and A1P1 has
      now been fully argued. We received full submissions from the
      respondents in support of their contention that their liability to
      pay the success fees and ATE premia infringed article 6 and A1P1. The
      case to the contrary was presented by the appellants, with supporting
      arguments from the Secretary of State for Justice, the General
      Council of the Bar, the Law Society of England and Wales, the
      Asbestos Victims Support Group Forum, and (in written form only) the
      Association of Business Recovery Professionals Limited. We also had
      submissions from the Media Lawyers Association, which were not
      directed to the point at issue.

      The legislative scheme in its historical context

  12. Section 17(1) of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 ("the 1990
      Act") stated that the general objective of Part II was the
      development of legal services in England and Wales "by making
      provision for new or better ways of providing such services and a
      wider choice of persons providing them, while maintaining the proper
      and efficient administration of justice". Section 58 permitted
      lawyers, for the first time, to enter into conditional fee agreements
      ("CFAs", which, as explained above, were "no win no fee" agreements
      under which a lawyer was only to be paid a fee if the client won the
      case) subject to satisfying prescribed conditions. The 1990 Act did
      not, however, permit the successful party to recover any "success
      fee" (ie the "uplift" or extra payment which the lawyer would receive
      in return for agreeing to act on a CFA rather than on the traditional
      basis) from the losing party.

  13. At the same time as CFAs were being developed under the new statutory
      regime, the Law Society developed a new form of insurance cover known
      as after the event insurance ("ATE"). An ATE premium was, as
      explained above, a sum of money paid to an insurer by a person
      involved in, or contemplating, litigation, in return for the insurer
      agreeing to underwrite (sometimes subject to a maximum) the person's
      liability to pay the costs of another party to the litigation. The
      ATE premium was not recoverable from the losing party under the 1990
      Act.

  14. In March 1998, the Government published a consultation paper entitled
      Access to Justice with Conditional Fees. In this paper, the
      Government stated that it considered that wider use of CFAs and legal
      expense insurance would promote access to justice. The Government
      expressly sought views on whether the success fee and the ATE
      insurance premium should be recoverable by the successful party. The
      majority of those who responded to the consultation supported the
      proposal that both should be recoverable. In December 1998, the
      Government published a White Paper, Modernising Justice (Cm 4155) in
      which it stated that it had decided to make it possible for the
      successful party to recover the success fee and ATE premium from the
      unsuccessful party. It said at para 2.44: "This will make conditional
      fees more attractive and fairer, and allow respondents and appellants
      whose case is not about money to use them. This will be a further
      radical expansion of access to justice".

  15. The 1999 Act gave effect to this policy decision. Part I of the 1999
      Act created a new Legal Services Commission (in place of the Legal
      Aid Board) with power to determine which types of litigation should
      qualify for public funding. From 1 April 2000, legal aid was no
      longer available for personal injury cases, although it continued to
      be available for clinical negligence cases.

  16. As to the recoverability of CFA success fees, section 27 of the 1999
      Act repealed section 58 of the 1990 Act and added a new section 58
      and a section 58A. Sections 58A(6) and (7) are in these terms:

              "(6) A costs order made in any proceedings may, subject in
              the case of court proceedings to rules of court, include
              provision requiring the payment of any fees payable under a
              conditional fee agreement which provides for a success fee.

              (7) Rules of court may make provision with respect to the
              assessment of any costs which include fees payable under a
              conditional fee agreement (including one which provides for a
              success fee)."

  17. As to the recoverability of ATE premiums, section 29 provided:

              "Where in any proceedings a costs order is made in favour of
              any party who has taken out an insurance policy against the
              risk of incurring a liability in those proceedings, the costs
              payable to him may, subject in the case of court proceedings
              to rules of court, include costs in respect of the premium of
              the policy."

  18. Following the enactment of the 1999 Act, the Lord Chancellor
      conducted a further consultation on the question of how success fees
      and ATE premiums (to which we shall refer compendiously as
      "additional liabilities") should be recoverable in practice. This
      included consultation on the content of the statutory instruments
      (and rules of court) which were necessary to give effect to the 1999
      Act. In January 2000, the Government published its response to the
      consultation. At para 14, it stated:

              "The Government's policy on the recoverability is to ensure
              that the expense of shifting all or part of the risk in
              costs, whether to the solicitor under a conditional fee
              agreement or an insurer under an insurance policy, are
              usually met by the losing party and not out of damages or the
              pocket of the winner …."

  19. The Civil Procedure Rules ("CPR") were amended by the Civil Procedure
      (Amendment No 3) Rules 2000 (SI 2000/1317) to reflect the new
      approach to CFAs and ATE premiums.

  20. CPR 43.2(1)(a) provided that "'costs' includes … any additional
      liability incurred under a funding arrangement" and CPR Rule
      43.2(1)(o) provided that "additional liability" included the
      percentage increase or success fee under a CFA and the premium
      payable for an ATE insurance policy. CPR Rule 44.4 set out the basis
      of assessment of costs. It provided:

              "(1) Where the court is to assess the amount of costs … it
              will assess those costs -

                  (a) on the standard basis; or

                  (b) on the indemnity basis,

              but the court will not in either case allow costs which have
              been unreasonably incurred or are unreasonable in amount.

              (2) Where the amount of costs is to be assessed on the
              standard basis, the court will -

                  (a) only allow costs which are proportionate to the
                  matters in issue …."

  21. Rule 44.5 set out the factors to be taken into account in deciding
      the amount of costs. It provided:

              (1) The court is to have regard to all the circumstances in
              deciding whether costs were -

                  (a) if it is assessing costs on the standard basis -

                      (i) proportionately and reasonably incurred; or

                      (ii) were proportionate and reasonable in amount.

                  (b) if it is assessing costs on the indemnity basis -

                      (i) unreasonably incurred; or

                      (ii) unreasonable in amount. …

              (3) The court must also have regard to -

              …

                  (b) the amount or value of any money or property
                  involved;

                  (c) the importance of the matter to all the parties;

                  (d) the particular complexity of the matter or the
                  difficulty or novelty of the questions raised;

                  (e) the skill, effort, specialised knowledge and
                  responsibility involved;

                  (f) the time spent on the case; and

                  (g) the place where and the circumstances in which work
                  or any part of it was done."

  22. The concept of using proportionality to assess costs, on the standard
      basis, had not played any part in the taxation, or assessment as it
      is now called, of costs under the Rules of the Supreme Court (as was
      recognised by the Court of Appeal in Home Office v Lownds [2002] EWCA
      Civ 365, [2002] 1 WLR 2450, para 2). The only test was that of
      reasonableness.

  23. Rule 44.3A contained provisions as to costs orders relating to
      funding arrangements, including CFAs and ATE insurance. Rule 44.3B
      set limits on what could be recovered under funding arrangements.

  24. As envisaged by the amendments that were made to the CPR, an amended
      costs practice direction was promulgated to supplement CPR Parts 43
      to 48 ("the CPD") in order to give effect to section 58A(6) and (7)
      of the 1999 Act. It is not in dispute that practice directions differ
      from rules in the CPR in that (a) they provide guidance that should
      be followed but do not have binding effect; and (b) should yield to
      rules in the CPR where there is a conflict between them: see White
      Book (2015), Vol II paras 12-15 to 12-18.

  25. Paragraph 9.1 of the CPD stated that "[u]nder an order for payment of
      'costs' the costs payable will include an additional liability
      incurred under a funding arrangement". Section 11 included the
      following:

              "11.1 In applying the test of proportionality the court will
              have regard to rule 1.1(2)(c). The relationship between the
              total of the costs incurred and the financial value of the
              claim may not be a reliable guide …

              11.2 In any proceedings there will be costs which will
              inevitably be incurred and which are necessary for the
              successful conduct of the case. Solicitors are not required
              to conduct litigation at rates which are uneconomic. Thus in
              a modest claim the proportion of costs is likely to be higher
              than in a large claim, and may even equal or possibly exceed
              the amount in dispute …

              11.5 In deciding whether the costs claimed are reasonable and
              (on a standard basis assessment) proportionate, the court
              will consider the amount of any additional liability
              separately from the base costs.

              11.6 In deciding whether the base costs are reasonable and
              (if relevant) proportionate the court will consider the
              factors set out in rule 44.5.

              11.7 Subject to para 17.8(2), when the court is considering
              the factors to be taken into account in assessing an
              additional liability, it will have regard to the facts and
              circumstances as they reasonably appeared to the solicitor or
              counsel when the funding arrangement was entered into and at
              the time of any variation of the arrangement.

              11.8 (1) In deciding whether a percentage increase is
              reasonable relevant factors to be taken into account may
              include:

                  (a) the risk that the circumstances in which the costs,
                  fees or expenses would be payable might or might not
                  occur;

                  (b) the legal representative's liability for any
                  disbursements;

                  (c) what other methods of financing the costs were
                  available to the receiving party.

                  …

              11.9 A percentage increase will not be reduced simply on the
              ground that, when added to base costs which are reasonable
              and (where relevant) proportionate, the total appears
              disproportionate.

              11.10 In deciding whether the cost of insurance cover is
              reasonable, relevant factors to be taken into account
              include:

                  (1) where the insurance cover is not purchased in support
                  of a conditional fee agreement with a success fee, how
                  its cost compares with the likely cost of funding the
                  case with a conditional fee agreement with a success fee
                  and supporting insurance cover;

                  (2) the level and extent of the cover provided;

                  (3) the availability of any pre-existing insurance cover;

                  (4) whether any part of the premium would be rebated in
                  the event of early settlement;

                  (5) the amount of commission payable to the receiving
                  party or his legal representative or other agents."

      The statutory aims of the changes introduced by the 1999 Act

  26. Lord Bingham, having referred to the 1999 Act as having "introduced a
      new regime for funding litigation", described the three key aims of
      the funding regime introduced under the 1999 Act in Callery v Gray
      (Nos 1 and 2) [2002] UKHL 28, [2002] 1 WLR 2000 as follows:

              "2. … One aim was to contain the rising cost of legal aid to
              public funds and enable existing expenditure to be refocused
              on causes with the greatest need to be funded at public
              expense, whether because of their intrinsic importance or
              because of the difficulty of funding them otherwise than out
              of public funds or for both those reasons. A second aim was
              to improve access to the courts for members of the public
              with meritorious claims. It was appreciated that the risk of
              incurring substantial liabilities in costs is a powerful
              disincentive to all but the very rich from becoming involved
              in litigation, and it was therefore hoped that the new
              arrangements would enable claimants to protect themselves
              against liability for paying costs either to those acting for
              them or (if they chose) to those on the other side. A third
              aim was to discourage weak claims and enable successful
              defendants to recover their costs in actions brought against
              them by indigent claimants."

      Although it is right to acknowledge that Lord Bingham referred
      earlier in the same paragraph to his opinion being only concerned
      with personal injury litigation, it seems clear that the observations
      which we have quoted were intended to be applicable to the "new
      regime" generally.

  27. In MGN Ltd v United Kingdom (2011) 53 EHRR 5, para 197 of the
      majority judgment of the European Court of Human Rights ("ECtHR")
      acknowledged that the CFA with recoverable success fees "sought to
      achieve the legitimate aim of the widest public access to legal
      services for civil litigation funded by the private sector". A
      deliberate policy of the 1999 Act regime was to impose the cost of
      all CFA litigation on unsuccessful respondents as a class: see per
      Lord Hoffmann in Campbell v MGN Ltd (No 2) [2005] UKHL 61, [2005] 1
      WLR 3394 at para 16. There was to be a fundamental rebalancing of the
      means of access to justice by resort to the private sector rather
      than by the use of public (legal aid) funds. Instead of placing a
      burden on the legal aid fund, legal proceedings were to be funded in
      the first instance by a party's lawyers (who would undertake the work
      "on risk" in exchange for a potential success fee) and then, if the
      proceedings were successful, the success fee would be transferred to
      the losing party.

  28. As Lord Bingham pointed out in para 4 of his speech in Callery, the
      new funding regime faced two contingencies which "had they occurred,
      could have proved fatal": (i) lawyers declining to act on a
      conditional fee basis; and (ii) no accessible market developing in
      ATE insurance. To counter the former, the maximum permissible
      percentage uplift was retained at 100% (as had been the case under
      the 1990 Act). As regards the latter, a healthy market for ATE
      insurance did in fact continue to develop.

      The meaning of proportionality

  29. The concept of proportionality lies at the heart of this case. It is
      important not to confuse two different meanings of proportionality
      which are in play here. Lord Hoffmann made the same point at para 23
      of his speech in Campbell v MGN Ltd (No 2).

  30. The first meaning of proportionality is that with which we are
      familiar in the context of the Convention. A valuable recent
      statement of what proportionality in this sense entails is to be
      found in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39, [2014] AC
      700. Lord Reed said at para 71:

              "An assessment of proportionality inevitably involves a value
              judgment at the stage at which a balance has to be struck
              between the importance of the objective pursued and the value
              of the right intruded upon. The principle does not however
              entitle the courts simply to substitute their own assessment
              for that of the decision-maker. As I have noted, the
              intensity of review under EU law and the Convention varies
              according to the nature of the right at stake and the context
              in which the interference occurs. Those are not however the
              only relevant factors. One important factor in relation to
              the Convention is that the Strasbourg court recognises that
              it may be less well placed than a national court to decide
              whether an appropriate balance has been struck in the
              particular national context. For that reason, in the
              Convention case law the principle of proportionality is
              indissolubly linked to the concept of the margin of
              appreciation. That concept does not apply in the same way at
              the national level, where the degree of restraint practised
              by courts in applying the principle of proportionality, and
              the extent to which they will respect the judgment of the
              primary decision maker, will depend upon the context, and
              will in part reflect national traditions and institutional
              culture. For these reasons, the approach adopted to
              proportionality at the national level cannot simply mirror
              that of the Strasbourg court."

  31. And at para 74, he set out the proportionality test in the following
      terms:

              "… it is necessary to determine (1) whether the objective of
              the measure is sufficiently important to justify the
              limitation of a protected right, (2) whether the measure is
              rationally connected to the objective, (3) whether a less
              intrusive measure could have been used without unacceptably
              compromising the achievement of the objective, and (4)
              whether, balancing the severity of the measure's effects on
              the rights of the persons to whom it applies against the
              importance of the objective, to the extent that the measure
              will contribute to its achievement, the former outweighs the
              latter."

  32. Lord Reed said that the intensity with which this proportionality
      test is applied "depends on the context" (para 70) and that "the
      intensity of review … varies according to the nature of the right at
      stake and the context in which the interference occurs" (para 71). In
      applying all four stages mentioned in para 74, appropriate weight
      must be given to informed legislative choices: see, for example, AXA
      General Insurance Ltd v The Lord Advocate [2011] UKSC 46, [2012] 1 AC
      868 at para 131. In the present context, the concept of
      "proportionality" in this sense focuses on the balance that is struck
      by the 1999 Act system between the rights of different types of
      litigant.

  33. The second meaning of proportionality finds expression in the CPR and
      is relevant to the assessment of costs. Thus where the amount of
      costs is to be assessed on the standard basis, the court will only
      allow costs "which are proportionate to the matters in issue" (rule
      44.4(2)(a)). An aspect of this is that the court must have regard to
      the various matters set out in rule 44.5(3) which we have set out at
      para 21 above. In Home Office v Lownds [2002] 1 WLR 2450, the Court
      of Appeal gave important guidance as to the application of
      proportionality in an assessment of costs on the standard basis. The
      court adopted the following statement at para 23:

              "In modern litigation, with the emphasis on proportionality,
              there is a requirement for parties to make an assessment at
              the outset of the likely value of the claim and its
              importance and complexity, and then to plan in advance the
              necessary work, the appropriate level of person to carry out
              the work, the overall time which would be necessary and
              appropriate spend on the various stages in bringing the
              action to trial and the likely overall cost. While it was not
              unusual for costs to exceed the amount in issue, it was, in
              the context of modest litigation such as the present case,
              one reason for seeking to curb the amount of work done, and
              the cost by reference to the need for proportionality."

  34. The court also said at para 31 that it was necessary to adopt a
      two-stage approach to the assessment of costs. The first stage was
      the "global" approach. At this stage, the question for the court was
      whether the total sum claimed was disproportionate in particular by
      reference to the considerations in rule 44.5(3). If the total did not
      appear to be disproportionate according to that test, all that was
      normally required was that each item of costs should have been
      reasonably incurred and the cost for that item should be reasonable.
      If the costs as a whole did appear to be disproportionate, then the
      court would want to be satisfied that the work in relation to each
      item was necessary and, if so, that the costs of each item was
      reasonable.

  35. The point was put clearly at para 28:

              "The reference in 11.2 to costs "which are necessary" is the
              key to how judges in assessing costs should give effect to
              the requirement of proportionality. If the appropriate
              conduct of the proceedings makes costs necessary then the
              requirement of proportionality does not prevent all the costs
              being recovered either on an item by item approach or on a
              global approach. The need to consider what costs are
              necessary is not a novel requirement. It was reflected by the
              former provisions of RSC Order 62 which applied to the
              taxation of costs prior to 1986. Rule 28(2) dealt with costs
              on a party and party basis and stated:

                  "... there shall be allowed all such costs as were
                  necessary or proper for the attainment of justice ...""

  36. In other words, where base costs were incurred which were necessary,
      they would be treated as being proportionate even if in fact they
      were not proportionate "to the matters in issue" (CPR 44.4(2)(a)), ie
      even if the total necessary costs were disproportionate to the value
      of the claim.

  37. The introduction of additional liabilities made the proportionality
      issue more acute. If apparently disproportionate base costs were
      recoverable under the new CPR regime because they were necessary,
      what was to be done where the base costs were inflated by additional
      liabilities?

  38. An additional liability was an element of costs: see CPR 43.2(1)(o).
      Costs which were unreasonably incurred or which were unreasonable in
      amount would not be allowed (CPR 44.4(1)). Accordingly, a success fee
      and an ATE premium would only be allowed to the extent that they were
      reasonably incurred and were reasonable in amount, having regard to
      the factors set out at CPR 44.5(3). On the standard basis, only costs
      which were proportionate to the matters in issue would be allowed
      (CPR 44.4(2)(a)). The proportionality limitation, therefore, applied
      to additional liabilities as well as to base costs. CPD para 11.5 did
      not disapply the proportionality criterion, but confirmed that
      additional liabilities were to be judged by reference to
      proportionality, albeit separately from the base costs. The criterion
      of proportionality therefore applied subject only to the limitation
      imposed by para 11.9.

  39. In Rogers v Merthyr Tydfil County Borough Council [2006] EWCA Civ
      1134, [2007] 1 WLR 808, the Court of Appeal had to consider whether
      an ATE premium was recoverable by a successful claimant. The court
      addressed the issue of proportionality at paras 102 to 106. The
      damages were agreed in the sum of £3,105 plus interest. The case went
      to trial and the claimant won. The deputy district judge assessed the
      costs in the sum of £16,821. This included an ATE premium of £5,103.
      The Court of Appeal held that the premium was recoverable as a
      proportionate expense if it was necessarily incurred, even if the
      amount was large in comparison with the amount of damages reasonably
      claimed. The court said:

              "105. In this case it might be thought that all the
              considerations urged on the court by Mr Bartlett which favour
              the course taken by Mr Cater, the appellant's solicitor,
              might go to demonstrate the reasonableness of his bill of
              costs – specifically, the ATE insurance staged premium – but
              not its proportionality: precisely because they have nothing
              to do with the quantum of the claim. But we do not think that
              is right. If the court concludes that it was necessary to
              incur the staged premium, then as this court's judgment in
              [Lownds] shows, it should be adjudged a proportionate
              expense. Necessity here is, we think, not some absolute
              litmus test. It may be demonstrated by the application of
              strategic considerations which travel beyond the dictates of
              the particular case. Thus it may include, as we are persuaded
              it does, the unavoidable characteristics of the market in
              insurance of this kind. It does so because this very market
              is integral to the means of providing access to justice in
              civil disputes in what may be called the post-legal aid
              world.

              106. It is important to recognise that this conclusion runs
              with, not across, the grain of the procedural reforms
              expressed in the CPR. The very recognition that justice
              requires a use of resources that is proportionate to what is
              at stake implies the rightness of a strategic approach. There
              can be no touchstone of a proportionate use of resources so
              understood, without an eye to the context in which any such
              resources are expended. Once it is concluded that the ATE
              staged premium here was necessarily incurred, principle and
              pragmatism together compel the conclusion that it was a
              proportionate expense. We turn therefore to the question
              whether the ATE staged premium was necessarily incurred."

  40. In other words, the court did not ask whether the premium was
      proportionate to the importance of the case and what was at stake.
      Instead it adopted the Lownds approach. If the premium was
      necessarily incurred, it was proportionate. And it was proportionate
      even though it was disproportionately high when compared with the
      amount of damages reasonably claimed. ATE insurance was integral to
      the fundamental objective of improving access to justice in civil
      litigation. A premium that was reasonable in amount (having regard to
      the litigation risk) was necessary and, therefore, proportionate.

  41. By the same reasoning, a success fee that was reasonable in amount
      was also necessary and, therefore, proportionate. This principle was
      applied in many cases. It was essential to the viability of the 1999
      Act scheme. In determining whether a success fee was reasonable, the
      courts had to consider whether it was proportionate to the litigation
      risk. Thus, for example, if a solicitor had only a 50% chance of
      earning payment by winning, it was commercially appropriate for him
      to charge a success fee of 100%. In two identical cases, he would
      statistically be paid only in one, so that to break even he needed to
      double his charges in the successful case. In other words, a success
      fee proportionate to the risk of going unpaid was calculated by
      dividing the risk of losing by the prospect of winning and
      multiplying the product by one hundred to yield a percentage. This is
      the so-called "ready-reckoner" approach which was approved by the
      Court of Appeal in cases such as Atack v Lee [2004] EWCA Civ 1712, 
      [2005] 1 WLR 2643 and routinely applied by costs judges. This
      approach only allowed a solicitor to charge for the risk he faced of
      going unpaid on the basis that he would thereby break even (and
      recover his normal costs) across his overall case-load. The
      ready-reckoner principles were also reflected in the statutory limit
      on success fees of 100% of a solicitor's basic charges. This fully
      allowed for solicitors taking on CFA cases with merits of at least
      50%, but not cases which were weaker than that.

      The respondents' case

  42. The submissions of Mr McCracken QC can be summarised as follows. The
      system set out in the CPD was incompatible with article 6 and A1P1 of
      the Convention in that it unjustifiably interfered with the article 6
      and A1P1 Convention rights of "non-rich" respondents who
      unsuccessfully contested litigation instituted by appellants who had
      the benefit of CFA agreements and ATE insurance.

  43. The system had a number of shortcomings which were described as
      "flaws" by Jackson LJ in his Review of Civil Litigation which were
      summarised by the ECtHR at paras 207 to 210 of its judgment in MGN v
      United Kingdom. The flaws were (i) the lack of focus of the regime
      and the lack of any qualifying requirements for appellants who would
      be allowed to enter into a CFA; (ii) the absence of any incentive for
      appellants to control the incurring of legal costs and the fact that
      judges assessed costs only at the end of the case when it was too
      late to control costs that had been spent; (iii) the "blackmail" or
      "chilling" effect of the regime which drove parties to settle early
      despite good prospects of a defence; and (iv) the fact that the
      regime gave the opportunity to "cherry pick" winning cases to conduct
      on CFAs. At para 217, the court concluded that:

              "… the depth and nature of the flaws in the system … are such
              that the court can conclude that the impugned scheme exceeded
              even the broad margin of appreciation to be accorded to the
              state in respect of general measures pursuing social and
              economic interests."

  44. These flaws were regarded by the ECtHR as sufficiently serious to
      lead it to conclude that the system was incompatible with article 10
      of the Convention. Mr McCracken submits that the same reasoning
      necessarily requires the court to hold that the system was also
      incompatible with article 6 and A1P1.

  45. The system was arbitrary. It singled out from the class of
      unsuccessful litigants a subset of those who happened to have been
      opposed by CFA/ATE-funded litigants and imposed on that subset the
      burden of funding other unsuccessful cases which did not involve them
      at all.

  46. The real vice of the system lay in the CPD. Paragraph 11.7 based the
      assessment of CFA uplifts and ATE premiums exclusively on the ex ante
      perspective of the CFA/ATE party; and para 11.9 expressly disallowed
      any reduction on the basis that the overall total of base costs and
      uplifts appeared to be disproportionate. Decisions on uplift
      therefore disregarded the financial circumstances of the payer, the
      importance to the payer of fighting the case and the reasonableness
      of his decision to fight.

  47. The system was not redeemed by the fact that costs were subject to
      assessment at the end of the proceedings. By that stage, it was too
      late to control what was being spent. Nor is it an answer to say that
      the court had the power to cap the costs of a CFA-funded and ATE
      insurance-protected party at an early stage.

  48. The system failed when tested against the questions identified by
      Lord Reed in Bank Mellat (No 2), at para 74 (see para 30 above). It
      is instructive to ask: could a system of private funding of
      litigation for the non-rich have been adopted which was less
      intrusive of payers' fundamental rights without unacceptably
      compromising the achievement of its objective? There must be an
      affirmative answer to this question. Apart from the current Legal
      Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 ("LASPO")
      scheme, examples of less intrusive schemes are: (i) a levy on all
      adverse costs payments by unsuccessful litigants could have funded
      the payment of additional liabilities under a modified version of the
      1999 Act system; (ii) the system could have been limited to claims
      against defined groups of "non-ordinary" people (such as
      insured/large organisations/public bodies); and (iii) the system
      could have incorporated provisions requiring consideration of all
      circumstances including (a) the proportionality of the total of base
      costs and uplifts and premiums, (b) those of the payer (such as his
      means, whether he was insured, the importance of fighting the case
      and his reasonableness in fighting the case).

  49. In order to render the system compatible with article 6 (and A1P1) of
      the Convention, all that is required is to read para 11.9 down in
      accordance with section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998 so as to
      provide a system incorporating the provisions set out at para 48(iii)
      above.

      MGN v United Kingdom

  50. The first question that we must consider is whether the decision of
      the ECtHR in MGN v United Kingdom requires us to hold that the 1999
      Act scheme is incompatible with article 6 and/or A1P1, at least in
      relation to the respondents in this case. In that case, the claimant
      sought damages for breach of confidence and compensation under the
      Data Protection Act 1998 in respect of the publication in The Daily
      Mirror of an article and photographs of her. She succeeded at first
      instance, but lost in the Court of Appeal. She entered into a CFA for
      the purposes of an appeal to the House of Lords. Her appeal was
      allowed. The respondents challenged the proportionality of the
      claimant's costs (including the success fee). The ECtHR held that
      there had been a violation of article 10 of the Convention (the right
      to freedom of expression) as regards the success fee that was payable
      by the respondents. In defending the CFA scheme, the UK Government
      advanced arguments similar to those that have been advanced by the
      Secretary of State (as well as by the appellants and some of the
      interveners) in the present case. The court held that the requirement
      to pay the success fees constituted an interference with the
      defendant's article 10 rights. The central issue was whether the UK
      authorities had struck a "fair balance" between freedom of expression
      protected by article 10 and an individual's right of access to court
      protected by article 6 (para 199).

  51. It is true that at paras 207 to 210 the court accepted that the
      scheme suffered from the four flaws identified in the Jackson report.
      These flaws were of general application and not confined to
      defamation and breach of privacy litigation. It is also true that the
      court said at para 217:

              "However, the court considers that the depth and nature of
              the flaws in the system, highlighted in convincing detail by
              the public consultation process, and accepted in important
              respects by the Ministry of Justice, are such that the court
              can conclude that the impugned scheme exceeded even the broad
              margin of appreciation to be accorded to the State in respect
              of general measures pursuing social and economic interests."

  52. However, the context in which the court made these criticisms was its
      concern about the effect of the scheme in defamation and privacy
      cases: see paras 211 to 215. The right of freedom of expression is
      always given particular weight by the ECtHR. As the court said at
      para 201, the most careful scrutiny is called for when measures are
      capable of discouraging the participation of the press in debates
      over matters of legitimate public concern. It concluded that a fair
      balance had not been struck between the article 10 rights of
      defendant publishers and the article 6 rights of appellants who
      allege defamation or breach of privacy. But in our judgment the
      balancing of the article 6 rights of appellants against those of
      respondents is an exercise of a wholly different character. There is
      no basis for concluding that it was implicit in the reasoning of the
      court that it would have held that the scheme violated the article 6
      rights of the respondents in that case. We reject the submission that
      the decision in MGN v United Kingdom requires us to hold that the
      1999 Act scheme is incompatible with article 6. Essentially for the
      same reasons, we do not consider that MGN v United Kingdom assists
      the respondents in relation to their case under A1P1.

      The four flaws

  53. We have summarised the four flaws to which the ECtHR referred in MGN
      v United Kingdom at para 43 above. We accept that the first flaw (the
      regime was unfocussed), the second flaw (the fact that costs were
      assessed only at the end of the case) and the fourth flaw (the
      opportunity for lawyers to cherry pick) were flaws in the system, but
      they could not have adversely affected the article 6 rights, or the
      A1P1 rights, of opposing parties. It is the third flaw which lies at
      the heart of the present case. It is described as the "blackmail" or
      "chilling" effect. Another way of describing it is as imposing a
      costs burden on opposing parties which is excessive and in some cases
      amounts to a denial of justice. Whether this flaw rendered the 1999
      Act scheme incompatible with article 6 or A1P1 is the central
      question that arises in this case and which we discuss in detail
      below.

  54. But before we do this, we need to refer to what Lord Neuberger
      described at para 37 of his judgment in Coventry v Lawrence (No 2) as
      four "unique and regrettable features" of the scheme on which the
      respondents also rely in support of their case. To some extent these
      features overlap with the four flaws. The first feature was that
      appellants had no interest in the level of fees which they agreed to
      pay their lawyers. The second was that in many cases unsuccessful
      respondents found themselves paying, in addition to their own costs,
      three times the appellants' "real" costs. The third was that
      proportionality was excluded from consideration in relation to the
      recovery of the success fee or ATE premium. The fourth was that the
      stronger the respondents' case, the greater their liability costs
      would be if they lost, since the size of the success fee and the
      premium should have reflected the appellants' prospects of success.

  55. The first feature was undoubtedly present in many cases, but the
      reasonableness of the base costs and the additional liabilities could
      always be the subject of scrutiny by the judge charged with the
      assessment of the costs. It put a particularly heavy responsibility
      on costs judges, but the fact that a paying opposing party was
      entitled to have the costs for which he was liable assessed by an
      independent and expert tribunal by reference to reasonableness must
      be a very strong mitigating factor. The second feature was present in
      those cases where there was a 100% success fee and a premium which
      equated with the extent of the claimant's "real" costs recovery. This
      might be the situation with some cases, but it was not a regular
      feature of the system as a whole. At best, it is no more than an
      arithmetical description of the 1999 Act scheme at its worst. The
      third feature (reflected in para 11.9 of the CPD) was an intrinsic
      part of the regime as a whole: see the discussion at paras 38 to 41
      above. The fourth feature was also an inevitable consequence of the
      regime, but it did not necessarily interfere with the article 6 or
      A1P1 rights of opposing parties.

      Unfairness

  56. Much has been made of the alleged unfairness of the system. But the
      issue is not whether the system was unfair or had "flaws". It is
      whether it was a disproportionate way of achieving the legitimate
      aim. In Swift v Secretary of State for Justice [2013] EWCA Civ 193, 
      [2013] 3 WLR 1151, Lord Dyson said at para 35:

              "… the question is not whether the existing law is unfair and
              could be made fairer. Nor is it whether the existing law is
              the fairest means of pursuing the legitimate aim referred to
              at para 23 above. Rather, the question is whether the
              existing law pursues that aim in a proportionate manner. The
              Strasbourg jurisprudence does not insist that a state pursues
              a legitimate aim in the fairest or most proportionate way. It
              requires no more than that it does so in a way which is
              proportionate. There may be a number of ways in which a
              legitimate aim can be pursued. Provided that the state has
              chosen one which is proportionate, Strasbourg demands no
              more."

  57. Although these observations were made in a context far removed from
      that with which we are concerned, they are apt here too.

      Was the 1999 Act scheme compatible with article 6 and A1P1 of the
      Convention?

  58. It is common ground that the question whether a fair balance has been
      struck between the interests of those litigants who have CFAs and ATE
      insurance and those who do not is one for the court to determine.
      But, even in a field such as access to justice and legal costs, the
      court, while being vigilant to protect fundamental rights, must give
      considerable weight to informed legislative choices, at least where
      state authorities are seeking to reconcile the competing interests of
      different groups in society. In such cases, they are bound to have to
      draw a line somewhere in order to mark where a particular interest
      prevails and another one yields. Making a reasonable assessment of
      where to draw the line, especially if that assessment involves
      balancing conflicting interests falls within the State's wide
      discretionary area of judgment. As Lord Bingham said in Brown v Stott 
      [2003] 1 AC 681, 703:

              "Judicial recognition and assertion of the human rights
              defined in the Convention is not a substitute for the
              processes of democratic government but a complement to them.
              While a national court does not accord the margin of
              appreciation recognised by the European court as a
              supra-national court, it will give weight to the decisions of
              a representative legislature and a democratic government
              within the discretionary area of judgment accorded to those
              bodies."

  59. The choices made by Parliament in enacting the 1999 Act followed a
      wide consultation to enable it to evaluate the various interests at
      stake. Similarly, in formulating the CPR and the CPD, the relevant
      rule-makers were (following consultation) in the best position to
      determine how to effect the reforms and how to strike the appropriate
      balance between the different types of litigant.

  60. An important question is whether the compatibility of the scheme
      should be judged "by reference to the generality of cases, so that a
      few unfortunate results are inevitable": see per Lord Neuberger in
      Coventry v Lawrence (No 2) at para 44. In Campbell v MGN Ltd (No 2),
      Lord Hoffmann considered that this approach should be adopted in
      relation to the question whether the 1999 Act scheme was compatible
      with article 10 of the Convention. He said:

              "26. … [C]oncentration on the individual case does not
              exclude recognising the desirability, in appropriate cases,
              of having a general rule in order to enable the scheme to
              work in a practical and effective way. It was for this reason
              that the European Court of Human Rights decided in James v
              United Kingdom (1986) 8 EHRR 123 that Parliament was entitled
              to pursue a social policy of allowing long leaseholders of
              low-rated houses to acquire their freeholds at concessionary
              rates, notwithstanding that the scheme also applied to some
              rich tenants who needed no such assistance.

              27. Thus, notwithstanding the need to examine the balance on
              the facts of the individual case, I think that the
              impracticality of requiring a means test and the small number
              of individuals who could be said to have sufficient resources
              to provide them with access to legal services entitled
              Parliament to lay down a general rule that CFAs are open to
              everyone."

  61. In MGN v United Kingdom, the ECtHR rejected the Government's
      submission that "any disproportionality visited on an individual case
      by the CFA/recoverable success fee regime was justified by the need
      to adopt provisions of general application when pursuing broad social
      and economic policy objectives" (para 202). The court seems to have
      rejected it because the lengthy public consultation that had taken
      place since 2003 had exposed flaws in the system that were too
      serious to survive scrutiny.

  62. Nevertheless, the ECtHR recognises that a legislative or regulatory
      scheme may in some circumstances be compatible with the Convention
      even if it operates harshly in individual cases. The issue was
      considered in some detail in Animal Defenders v United Kingdom 
      (2013) 57 EHRR 21. That case involved a challenge to the UK laws
      which ban political advertising on TV and radio. There was no dispute
      that the ban amounted to an interference with article 10 rights, was
      prescribed by law and pursued a legitimate aim. The issue was whether
      the interference was proportionate to the legitimate aim. The court
      made the following preliminary remarks to the effect that a scheme
      can be compatible with the Convention even though it produces hard
      results in individual cases. It said:

              "106. Whether or not the interference was so pleaded in the
              above-cited VgT case, the present parties accepted that
              political advertising could be regulated by a general measure
              and they disagreed only on the breadth of the general measure
              chosen. It is recalled that a state can, consistently with
              the Convention, adopt general measures which apply to
              pre-defined situations regardless of the individual facts of
              each case even if this might result in individual hard cases.
              Contrary to the applicant's submission, a general measure is
              to be distinguished from a prior restraint imposed on an
              individual act of expression.

              107. The necessity for a general measure has been examined by
              the court in a variety of contexts such as economic and
              social policy … and welfare and pensions … it has also been
              examined in the context of electoral laws; prisoner voting;
              and artificial insemination for prisoners; the destruction of
              frozen embryos; and assisted suicide; as well as in the
              context of a prohibition on religious advertising ….

              108. It emerges from that case-law that, in order to
              determine the proportionality of a general measure, the court
              must primarily assess the legislative choices underlying it.
              … The quality of the parliamentary and judicial review of the
              necessity of the measure is of particular importance in this
              respect, including to the operation of the relevant margin of
              appreciation. … It is also relevant to take into account the
              risk of abuse if a general measure were to be relaxed, that
              being a risk which is primarily for the State to assess. A
              general measure has been found to be a more feasible means of
              achieving the legitimate aim than a provision allowing a
              case-by-case examination, when the latter would give rise to
              a risk of significant uncertainty …, of litigation, expense
              and delay … as well as of discrimination and arbitrariness. …
              The application of the general measure to the facts of the
              case remains, however, illustrative of its impact in practice
              and is thus material to its proportionality ….

              109. It follows that the more convincing the general
              justifications for the general measure are, the less
              importance the court will attach to its impact in the
              particular case ….

              110. The central question as regards such measures is not, as
              the applicant suggested, whether less restrictive rules
              should have been adopted or, indeed, whether the State could
              prove that, without the prohibition, the legitimate aim would
              not be achieved. Rather the core issue is whether, in
              adopting the general measure and striking the balance it did,
              the legislature acted within the margin of appreciation
              afforded to it …."

  63. The court held that there was no violation of article 10 because the
      impact of the prohibition did not outweigh the convincing
      justifications for the general measure (para 124). When the same
      issue had been before the House of Lords, Lord Bingham said the same
      thing, namely that "[a] general rule means that a line must be drawn,
      and it is for Parliament to decide where", and added that this
      "inevitably means that hard cases will arise falling on the wrong
      side of it, but that should not be held to invalidate the rule if,
      judged in the round, it is beneficial" - R (Animal Defenders
      International) v Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport 
      [2008] UKHL 15, [2008] 1 AC 1312, para 33.

  64. In our judgment, there is a powerful argument that the 1999 Act
      scheme is compatible with the Convention for the simple reason that
      it is a general measure which was (i) justified by the need to widen
      access to justice to litigants following the withdrawal of legal aid;
      (ii) made following wide consultation and (iii) fell within the wide
      area of discretionary judgment of the legislature and rule-makers to
      make. On that basis, it is no answer to say that other measures could
      have been taken which would have operated less harshly on non-rich
      respondents: the reasoning of the ECtHR at para 110 of the Animal
      Defenders case is particularly apposite here. Nevertheless, we do not
      propose to base our conclusion solely on this argument: we bear in
      mind the fact that it was rejected in MGN v United Kingdom, albeit in
      the context of an article 10 case. Accordingly, we proceed to examine
      the position rather more critically.

  65. The withdrawal of legal aid in most areas of civil litigation
      presented a real problem for the government. It had to decide how to
      secure access to justice for those who previously qualified for legal
      aid. Under the first scheme that was adopted (and which was in force
      from 1995 until 2000), when success fees were permitted for the first
      time and ATE insurance was first encouraged, the success fee and ATE
      insurance premium were not recoverable from the opposing party. The
      problems with this scheme included that (i) it only worked well where
      appellants sought substantial monetary relief (thereby realising a
      fund, in the event of success, from which the success fee would be
      paid) and (ii) damages recoverable by CFA appellants were eroded by
      the irrecoverable cost of funding and ATE insurance.

  66. These difficulties were overcome by the 1999 Act scheme. The first
      difficulty was overcome because a substantial fund of damages was no
      longer necessary to secure the payment of success fees and ATE
      premiums: inter partes costs orders were sufficient. The second
      difficulty was resolved because damages (or, in a low money or
      non-money claim, the litigant's own funds) were no longer eroded by
      irrecoverable success fees and premiums. In policy terms, the
      principal shift from the first scheme to the second scheme was to
      transfer the cost of financing successful claims from winning
      litigants to losing litigants. The cost of unsuccessful claims
      remained with lawyers and ATE insurers.

  67. The potential unfairness of the 1999 Act scheme on unsuccessful
      litigants was mitigated by the fact that district judges and costs
      judges would perform the role of "watchdog" as Lord Bingham described
      it in Callery v Gray (Nos 1 and 2) [2002] UKHL 28, [2002] 1 WLR 2000 
      at para 6. Lord Bingham said that the courts would be astute to check
      any practices which might undermine the fairness of the new funding
      regime, which was to "operate so as to promote access to justice and
      not so as to confer disproportionate benefits on legal practitioners
      or after the event insurers or impose unfair burdens on respondents
      or their insurers" (para 10). Thus the base cost and any additional
      liabilities were to be assessed by the court. As to base costs, where
      costs were to be paid on the standard basis they were to be judged by
      the criteria of reasonableness and proportionality. Where costs were
      to be paid on the indemnity basis, they were to be judged by the sole
      criterion of reasonableness. As regards any additional liability, a
      successful litigant was only entitled to a reasonable success fee and
      ATE premium and (where costs were assessed on the standard basis) a
      proportionate success fee (as explained in Lownds). In an appropriate
      case, the court had the ability to make a cost-capping order as was
      required, for example, by the Court of Appeal in King v Telegraph
      Group Ltd [2004] EWCA Civ 613, [2005] 1 WLR 2282.

  68. Nor should it be overlooked that respondents could themselves enter
      into CFAs and take out ATE insurance.

  69. There was, and indeed there is, no perfect solution to the problem of
      how best to enhance access to justice following the withdrawal of
      legal aid for most civil cases. A successful defendant was often
      better off under the 1999 Act scheme than he had been when legal aid
      was generally available to appellants. At that time, a successful
      defendant usually had to bear his own costs of defending a claim. The
      appellant did not have the means to meet the defendant's costs and it
      was a rare case in which a successful defendant would be able to
      obtain its costs from the legal aid fund. Under the 1999 Act regime,
      the successful defendant would usually obtain its costs from the ATE
      insurer. On the other hand, the unsuccessful defendant was
      unquestionably better off under the previous regime because it was
      only liable for the claimant's base costs. This was the policy choice
      that was made by Parliament.

  70. Mr McCracken submits that the current LASPO scheme (based on the
      proposals for reform made by Sir Rupert Jackson) is fairer than the
      scheme that it replaced. The LASPO scheme was intended to readjust
      the balance which had been adjusted in 1990 and 1999, and it has
      inevitably curtailed access to the courts in some respects as a
      result, as is demonstrated by the facts of this case. Appellants of
      modest means cannot finance litigation without a CFA. But that
      inevitably requires them to pay a success fee on their solicitors'
      and counsel's basic charges. In a substantial case, these costs are
      bound to be high. How is the success fee to be paid by appellants who
      bring claims for non-financial remedies or where the damages claimed
      are very small? Sir Rupert recognised the problem, when he called for
      general damages to be increased by 10%. This was effected by the
      Court of Appeal in Simmons v Castle [2012] EWCA Civ 1039 and 1288, 
      [2013] 1 WLR 1239. But in the present case, this would have benefited
      the appellants to the extent of only £2,085. Even if the success fees
      were to be substantially reduced on assessment, this increase in
      damages would represent a very small fraction of the overall figure.
      In short, under the LASPO regime, the present litigation would not
      have been viable. The success fees are almost certainly more than the
      appellants' likely damages, and more than the financial value of the
      rights they are attempting to protect (the diminution in value of
      their home being, on the expert evidence, no more than £74,000).

  71. Sir Rupert Jackson also recognised the serious impediment that inter
      partes costs liability would cause if ATE premiums were not to be
      recoverable. That is why he proposed qualified one-way costs shifting
      (QOCS). But QOCS was only introduced in respect of personal injury
      claims. It has no impact on other claims brought by litigants of
      relatively modest means (such as the present claim).

  72. The reason for referring to the LASPO scheme at some length is not to
      criticise the Jackson reforms, but (i) to show that there are
      restrictions on access to justice inherent in the LASPO scheme and
      (ii) to demonstrate that, at least in the absence of a widely
      accessible civil legal aid system (which had ceased to exist by
      1999), it is impossible to devise a fair scheme which promotes access
      to justice for all litigants.

  73. At this stage, we should comment on the other "less intrusive"
      schemes suggested by Mr McCracken. A levy on all adverse costs
      payments by unsuccessful litigants would be a radically different
      scheme from anything adopted hitherto in our civil justice system. It
      would require primary legislation and would probably be highly
      controversial. It is impossible to predict how politically acceptable
      such a proposal would be and what consequences it would bring in its
      train. It is at best a proposal whose potential effect and
      effectiveness is no more than speculative. We reject the idea that,
      viewed in the round, it would better promote the Convention rights of
      litigants than the 1999 Act scheme.

  74. We also reject the suggestion that the 1999 Act scheme should have
      been limited to defined categories of rich litigants, on the basis
      that, if it had been limited in this way, it would have been unlikely
      to interfere with their article 6 or A1P1 rights. But how would a
      "large organisation" have been defined? Even large organisations
      become insolvent or at least face financial difficulties from time to
      time. How (if at all) would the scheme have taken account of the fact
      that some individuals are wealthier than some large organisations? At
      what stage of the proceedings would a decision have been made by the
      court on the question whether the litigant fell within the category
      of rich litigants? In our view, questions such as these demonstrate
      that a scheme limited to defined categories of rich litigants would
      have been uncertain and arbitrary, and would almost certainly have
      led to a great deal of expensive and time-consuming "satellite"
      litigation to determine the extent of the means of many actual and
      potential litigants.

  75. The most sustained argument was that a scheme less intrusive of an
      unsuccessful litigant's article 6 rights would have required
      consideration of all the circumstances including (a) the
      proportionality of the total of base costs and uplifts and premiums
      and (b) all of the payer's circumstances. It is important to clarify
      that proportionate costs in this context means costs which were
      proportionate to what was at stake in the litigation. The argument is
      that, even if the total costs (including uplifts and premiums) were
      reasonably and necessarily incurred by the litigant in order to have
      the benefit of legal representation, they should not have been
      allowed on assessment to the extent that they exceeded a sum which
      was proportionate to what was at stake.

  76. Much of Mr McCracken's attack therefore was directed at CPD 11.9. But
      CPD 11.9 cannot be viewed in isolation. CPD 11 made separate
      provision for base costs and additional liability. CPD 11.5 provided
      that the court would consider the amount of any additional liability
      separately from the base costs. CPD 11.7 provided that, when the
      court was considering the factors to be taken into account in
      assessing an additional liability, it would have regard to the facts
      and circumstances "as they reasonably appeared to the solicitor or
      counsel when the funding arrangement was entered into …". By
      contrast, the assessment of base costs was conducted ex post facto on
      the basis of what happened in the litigation. The reason for treating
      the assessment of an additional liability differently was that, if
      legal representatives knew that the assessment of the reasonableness
      and proportionality of their success fees would be reviewed by the
      court on an ex post facto basis (rather than on the basis of what
      they reasonably thought would happen), this would have been likely to
      discourage them from entering into CFAs. They would have been
      concerned that, if they were successful, the success fees payable by
      the unsuccessful party might be reduced for reasons which they could
      not reasonably have foreseen when they entered into the CFA. They
      would have been faced with the unattractive choice between foregoing
      the unrecovered part of the fee or seeking to recover it from their
      client. That would have risked undermining the whole system
      introduced by the 1999 Act.

  77. CPD 11.9 provided that a percentage increase would not be reduced
      simply on the ground that, when added to base costs which were
      reasonable and (where relevant proportionate), the total appeared
      disproportionate. Like CPD 11.5, this provision was necessary to make
      the scheme work. If legal representatives knew that reasonable
      success fees were liable to be reduced on the grounds that, when
      added to the base costs, the total appeared to be disproportionate,
      this would have been likely to deter them from entering into CFAs.
      Success fees were calculated on the basis of an assessment of the
      risk of losing (the so-called "ready-reckoner approach"). That was
      intrinsic to the CFA system. To use the language of Lownds, a
      reasonable success fee was necessary to fund the litigation. The
      reasoning in Rogers is apposite here. As we have seen, the court held
      that, if an ATE premium was necessarily incurred, it was to be
      regarded as proportionate and therefore recoverable. It was "integral
      to the means of providing access to justice in civil disputes in what
      may be called the post-legal aid world": [2007] 1 WLR 808, para 105.
      So too was a CFA success fee. It was necessary in order to secure
      access to justice. It was therefore proportionate. If it were
      otherwise, there would have been a real danger (to put it no higher)
      that litigants who previously qualified for legal aid would have been
      unrepresented and the fundamental and legitimate aim of the 1999 Act
      scheme would have been frustrated.

  78. In summary, if the basis upon which Mr McCracken's attack on section
      11.7 and 11.9 was founded were to be accepted, it would have
      imperilled the whole scheme which had been put in place by the 1999
      Act, because lawyers would have been unwilling to enter into CFAs for
      fear that, even if successful, the uplift which they had agreed on
      the basis envisaged by the system embodied in the 1999 Act would have
      been liable to be reduced or disallowed on assessment because it
      would have been held to have been disproportionate to what was at
      stake in the litigation.

  79. Nor can we accept that the scheme was incompatible with the
      Convention on the grounds that the assessment of the successful
      party's total costs did not take account of the paying party's
      financial circumstances. So far as we are aware, the financial
      position of the paying party has never been a relevant factor in
      determining the assessment of reasonable and proportionate costs. As
      already mentioned, if the position were otherwise, there would be a
      real risk of protracted and expensive disputes as to the true
      financial worth of the paying party, often with requests for
      disclosure of documents and cross-examination. In other words, it
      would lead to satellite litigation, with the expenses, delays and
      uncertainties which such litigation normally involves.

  80. We should interpolate that it was suggested in argument that the
      rules already provided that the financial circumstances of the paying
      party could (and perhaps should) be taken into account in the
      assessment of costs. CPR rule 44.5(1) required the court to have
      regard "to all the circumstances" in deciding costs. CPR 1.2 required
      the court to give effect to the "overriding objective" of dealing
      with cases justly when exercising any power under the Rules. CPR
      1.1(2) provided that dealing with cases justly and at proportionate
      cost includes so far as practicable "(c) dealing with the case in
      ways which are proportionate – (iv) to the financial position of each
      party". Finally, para 11.1 of the CPD provided that in applying the
      test of proportionality "the court will have regard to rule
      1.1(2)(c)".

  81. If para 11.1 of the CPD is left out of account, we are satisfied that
      the CPR did not require or permit costs to be assessed by reference
      to the financial position of the parties. CPR 44.5 set out the
      factors to be taken into account in assessing costs. They did not
      include the financial circumstances of the parties. That is not at
      all surprising. If the fact that the paying party had limited
      resources militated in favour of reducing the amount of costs that it
      was reasonable for him to pay, then why should the fact that he was
      wealthy not militate in favour of increasing the costs? The logic of
      the argument should also mean that the financial circumstances of the
      receiving party was relevant. We are satisfied that this cannot have
      been intended by the draftsman of the rules. If the draftsman had
      intended financial circumstances to be taken into account, he would
      have included them as a relevant factor in CPR 44.5. We do not
      consider that financial circumstances could be introduced as an
      additional relevant factor by means of CPR 1.1(2)(c). If rule
      1.1(2)(c) was relevant to the assessment of costs at all, it related
      only to the manner in which the process of the assessment was
      conducted. It was not relevant to the amount of costs to be paid.

  82. Paragraph 11.1 of the CPD did, however, purport to go further than
      the rules. It purported to say that the court would have regard to
      the financial position of each party in applying the test of
      proportionality. In our view, this conflicted with the rules which,
      for the reasons that we have given, did not permit this. It should,
      therefore, not have been followed or should have been disapplied: see
      para 24 above.

  83. To summarise. It was undoubtedly a feature of the 1999 Act scheme
      that the costs awarded to successful appellants who had the benefit
      of CFAs could be very high indeed. For that reason, it had the
      potential to place respondents under considerable pressure to settle
      before even more costs were incurred. This is the third flaw
      identified by the ECtHR in MGN v United Kingdom and the second of
      Lord Neuberger's four unique and regrettable features. We accept
      that, in a number of individual cases, the scheme might be said to
      have interfered with a defendant's right of access to justice. But
      for the reasons stated earlier (paras 58 to 63 above), it is
      necessary to concentrate on the scheme as a whole. The scheme as a
      whole was a rational and coherent scheme for providing access to
      justice to those to whom it would probably otherwise have been
      denied. It was subject to certain safeguards. The government was
      entitled to a considerable area of discretionary judgment in choosing
      the scheme that it considered would strike the right balance between
      the interests of appellants and respondents whilst at the same time
      securing access to justice to those who would previously have
      qualified for legal aid. It had to find a solution to the problem
      created by the withdrawal of legal aid. The government has now
      produced three different schemes. Each was produced after wide
      consultation. Each has generated considerable criticism. As already
      indicated, once civil legal aid was constrained to the extent that it
      was in 1999, it became impossible to come up with a solution which
      would meet with universal approval. This is relevant to the question
      whether the 1999 Act scheme struck a fair balance between the
      interests of different litigants.

  84. For the reasons that we have given, we are satisfied that the scheme
      was not incompatible with article 6 or A1P1.

  85. For completeness, we should add that it was argued that, in any
      event, at least one of the respondents had failed to establish that
      he was not "non-ordinary" or "non-rich" (see para 48), either because
      there was no evidence of his means or because he was in fact insured
      against liability for nuisance. For the reasons we have given, it is
      unnecessary to decide whether that is a well-founded argument.
      However, the very fact that it has been raised demonstrates the risk
      of satellite litigation if the respondents' case is accepted: it
      would be necessary to assess a party's means and liabilities,
      identify the precise terms of an insurance policy that has been
      mislaid, and then decide whether it covered nuisance by noise.

      Remedy

  86. This only arises if (contrary to our view) the system was
      incompatible with article 6 and A1P1. No-one is arguing for a
      declaration of incompatibility under section 4 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998. There is nothing in the language of the 1999 Act which
      requires any particular scheme. We cannot read "may" in section 58A
      as meaning "must". The statute permits a scheme to be created (by
      rules and practice directions), but it does no more than that.

  87. As we have said, the real complaint is about paras 11.7 and 11.9 of
      the CPD, especially para 11.9. If these render the scheme
      incompatible for the reasons given by Mr McCracken, the question
      arises whether they can and should be "read down" or disapplied so to
      require consideration of all the circumstances including (a) the
      proportionality (to the matters in issue in the litigation) of the
      total of base costs and uplifts and premiums; and (b) the financial
      circumstances of the paying party.

  88. We do not consider that it is possible to read down para 11.9 in
      accordance with possibility (a) or to disapply it. It would involve a
      radical departure from the Lownds approach to proportionality. The
      question would not be whether the success fee and ATE premium were
      necessary (and therefore treated as proportionate), but rather
      whether they were in fact proportionate. The focus of the former
      question in a CFA case was on the reasonableness of the fee and
      premium having regard to the litigation risk. The focus of the latter
      question was on whether the amount of the costs was proportionate to
      what was at stake in the litigation. In our judgment, it is
      impermissible to do this under the guise of interpretation. As we
      have explained at paras 75 to 77 above, lawyers would have been
      deterred from entering into CFAs if they knew that the success fees
      were susceptible to reduction on the grounds that, when added to base
      costs, they appeared to be disproportionate to the matters in issue.
      Paragraph 11.9 was integral to the scheme. It cannot be interpreted
      away.

  89. Even if it was open to us to read down para 11.9 in the way for which
      Mr McCracken contends we do not consider that it would be right to do
      so. Nor would it be right to disapply it. As the Bar Council points
      out, the Court of Appeal actively shaped the law relating to
      additional liabilities throughout the period from 2000 until 2013. It
      was implicit in all of the cases that success fees (often substantial
      success fees) were recoverable. In none of the cases did the court
      disallow or reduce the amounts payable in success fees on the grounds
      that they were so high as to amount to a breach of the paying party's
      Convention rights. In these circumstances, litigants and their
      lawyers had a legitimate expectation that the court would not (at
      least without reasonable notice) decide that these fees were in
      principle incompatible with the Convention.

  90. This is no mere abstract statement. A decision to declare that the
      1999 Act scheme was incompatible with the Convention would have a
      serious impact on many thousands of pre-April 2013 cases which are in
      run-off, as well as claims to which the pre-Jackson costs rules
      continue to apply, such as mesothelioma, insolvency and publication
      and privacy cases. Any order made by this court in the present case
      would have no effect on the contractual obligations of litigants to
      pay success fees to their lawyers and ATE premiums to their insurers.
      Successful parties would, therefore, still be liable to pay their
      lawyers and insurers if they won their cases and could not recover
      them from unsuccessful respondents.

  91. Mr McCracken responds with three points. First, he says that there
      are good prospects that the lawyers would not seek to enforce the
      success fees for reasons of (i) decency, (ii) reputational risk and
      (iii) questionable enforceability in view of advice (in a situation
      of conflict of interest) about agreements with these problematic
      terms. Secondly, some appellants entered into CFAs and ATE insurance
      policies in the knowledge that their terms made them liable to pay
      the success fee and premium in the event of success even if, for
      whatever reason, those sums were not in fact recovered from the
      defendant. It cannot be said that an order disallowing recovery of
      success fee and ATE insurance premium would impose on such a claimant
      a burden he never envisaged having to assume. Thirdly, if the lawyer
      did not advise the claimant that he should at least consider not
      entering into a CFA or ATE insurance policy unless his liability to
      pay the success fee or premium was limited to whatever was actually
      recovered from the paying party, or provide some other assurance that
      they would not have to pay in uplift more than they could sensibly
      risk, then they would potentially have a remedy in negligence against
      the lawyer.

  92. We do not consider that these points provide a sufficient answer. We
      accept that some lawyers might not seek to enforce the success fees.
      But others might well do so, particularly if their client had means.
      It would be quite wrong to assume that only litigants of modest
      resources would have entered into CFAs. As regards the second point,
      we accept that the terms of some CFAs and ATE policies imposed a
      burden on the litigant to pay the success fee and premium in certain
      circumstances. But it does not follow that all litigants who entered
      into CFAs and ATE premiums did so in the belief that they were at
      risk, even if successful, of having to pay the success fee and
      premium. We suspect that many such litigants would have been most
      surprised to be told that this was the position. As for the third
      point, in view of the fact that CFAs and ATE insurance policies had
      been routinely used throughout the period 2000-2013 and sanctioned by
      the courts (even the House of Lords) without any suggestion that they
      were incompatible with article 6 or A1P1 or otherwise unlawful, it
      would be remarkable if a lawyer who advised his client to enter into
      a typical CFA and take out a typical ATE insurance policy could be
      said to have acted negligently.

  93. The result of declaring that the 1999 Act scheme was contrary to the
      Convention might also be that some appellants would decide to abandon
      their claims so as to avoid incurring further irrecoverable
      liabilities.

  94. As regards the financial circumstances of the paying party, to take
      these into account would involve a substantial change to the CPD and
      rules as we have interpreted them at paras 78 to 81 above. This too
      would involve a fundamental change to the 1999 Act scheme and cannot
      be achieved under the guise of interpretation.

      Conclusion

  95. For the reasons that we have given, the 1999 Act scheme was
      compatible with article 6 and A1P1. We have not addressed A1P1
      separately. That is because it has (rightly) not been suggested that,
      if the scheme was compatible with article 6, it could nevertheless
      for some other reason be incompatible with A1P1.

  96. If (contrary to our view) the scheme was incompatible with article 6
      and A1P1, we would not read it down so as to make it compatible and
      we would not strike the scheme down or disapply it.

      LORD MANCE: (with whom Lord Carnwath agrees)

  97. This is an awkward case. The Supreme Court is embarked on an
      examination of a system of costs which, despite its replacement in
      2013 for future litigation by the LASPO scheme, remains applicable in
      many pending cases, and which appellate courts have from 1999 onwards
      repeatedly endorsed, developed and enforced: see eg Callery v Gray 
      [2001] EWCA Civ 1117, [2001] 1 WLR 2112 and [2002] UKHL 28, [2002] 1
      WLR 2000; Atack v Lee [2004] EWCA Civ 1712, [2005] 1 WLR 2643;
      Halloran v Delaney [2002] EWCA Civ 1258, [2003] 1 WLR 28; In re
      Claims Direct Test Cases [2003] EWCA Civ 136, [2003] 4 All ER 508; U
      v Liverpool City Council (Practice Note) [2005] EWCA Civ 475, [2005]
      1 WLR 2657; Rogers v Methyr Tydfil County Borough Council (Law
      Society intervening) (Practice Note) [2006] EWCA Civ 1134, [2007] 1
      WLR 808; Crane v Canons Leisure Centre [2007] EWCA Civ 1352, [2008] 1
      WLR 2549; and C v W [2008] EWCA Civ 1459; [2009] 4 All ER 1129.

  98. Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson make a powerful case in their judgment
      for a conclusion that the system of costs not only fulfils the
      legitimate aim of affording access to justice to appellants (that is
      unchallenged), but does so in a way which falls within the wide area
      of discretionary judgment which rule-makers must be recognised as
      having when balancing the interests of those seeking access to
      justice and respondents faced with the additional burden of costs
      which the system could impose.

  99. In striking such a balance, the state is entitled to look at the
      system as a whole, and the possibility of individual hard cases is
      not itself fatal: see Animal Defenders cases, cited by Lord Neuberger
      and Lord Dyson in paras 62 and 63. As the ECtHR there put it, "the
      more convincing the general justifications for the general measure
      are, the less importance the court will attach to its impact in the
      particular case", and Lord Bingham in the House of Lords had said the
      same thing. See also James v United Kingdom (1986) 8 EHRR 123.

 100. Nonetheless, the European Court of Human Rights was in MGN Ltd v
      United Kingdom (2011) 53 EHRR 5 persuaded, after an examination of
      the system and of the flaws in it identified by Sir Rupert Jackson
      and accepted by the Government, that, despite its legitimate aim to
      promote access to justice, it operated disproportionately in the
      context of claims for defamation, because of its effect on the right
      to freedom of expression protected under article 10 of the
      Convention.

 101. The appellants, supported by the Secretary of State for Justice and
      legal professional and other bodies, distinguish this decision and
      its reasoning on the basis that there is here no competing interest
      comparable to freedom of expression. Instead, the respondents are
      relying upon their own right of access to justice under article 6
      and/or their right to protection of their property under paragraph 1
      of protocol 1 to the Convention ("A1P1").

 102. Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson accept this distinction, and regard the
      balancing exercise involved in the present appeal as being "of a
      wholly different character" (para 52). In para 79 they discount any
      suggestion that the scheme in force from 1999 to 2013 was
      incompatible because it did not take account of the paying party's
      financial circumstances, but in para 83 they accept that, in a number
      of individual cases, it might be said to have interfered with a
      respondent's right of access to justice. Nonetheless, they conclude
      that, viewed as a whole, it was rational and coherent, and not
      incompatible with either article 6 or A1P1.

 103. While freedom of expression is a particularly powerful interest under
      the Convention, the interest of any respondent in being able to
      defend himself or itself in litigation, at a reasonable and
      proportionate cost is, in my opinion, also one of some weight; and it
      certainly engages (as I understand Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson to
      accept) a balancing exercise, when set against the countervailing
      interest that appellants should have the access to justice which the
      system was designed to give.

 104. In this context, the strength of the present respondents' case lies
      in their claim to be individuals or small undertakings carrying on
      modest businesses without insurance and faced with one-off
      litigation, which has involved them in eye-catchingly large costs
      exposure. Precisely how compelling this claim is, as Lord Neuberger
      and Lord Dyson note (para 85), untested. Even small businesses,
      carrying on motor racing activities, would be expected to carry some
      forms of insurance, although it is at least open to doubt whether the
      insurance against nuisance which at any rate the first respondent
      carried covered nuisance by noise; and whether noise insurance would
      have been available to, or have been expected to be obtained by,
      either the second or third respondent has not been investigated.

 105. Whatever the position in this regard, the balancing exercise and any
      decision as to the validity of the system and the grant of any relief
      must all be undertaken taking account of the circumstances and
      competing interests as they stand at the time of the present
      proceedings. It is unnecessary and indeed inappropriate to scrutinise
      the scheme in the same way as would or might have been appropriate
      before or when it first came into force. Since then, much water has
      flowed under the bridge, in terms of the rules made and practice
      directions issued under the legislation, and the constant
      jurisprudence of domestic courts endorsing the system and of
      litigants and their lawyers acting on the basis that it applied and
      was valid.

 106. I do not in this context accept the submission, made by the
      respondents and supported by the Department of Justice for Northern
      Ireland, that litigants and their lawyers cannot have had a
      legitimate expectation that the system would apply and be upheld.
      When appellate courts have repeatedly endorsed the system, it seems
      to me unrealistic to expect them to have avoided use of the system
      from concern about what would, if appreciated at all, have been seen
      as a remote risk that courts might change their attitude. I also
      consider that their legitimate expectation that the system would be
      enforced is one which falls to be taken into account at the present
      stage, and is not merely a matter that might (being itself a
      protected possession within A1P1) be raised as against the United
      Kingdom in Strasbourg.

 107. In the above circumstances, I reject the respondents' challenge to
      the system of costs whereby they are potentially liable in respect of
      success fees agreed and ATE premia incurred by the appellants. The
      position must, as Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson have said, be
      considered as a whole. The system had a legitimate aim, the present
      is on its face an extreme and unusual case. It is difficult to
      conceive of any solution which would cater for such cases, without
      imperilling the whole system. The system has been repeatedly endorsed
      by domestic courts over a decade. Litigants and their lawyers have
      justifiably relied upon its validity. Legal certainty, consistency
      and the legitimate expectations which have so been generated all
      militate in favour of the Supreme Court upholding the system (though
      it can of course still be challenged as against the United Kingdom in
      proceedings in Strasbourg); and I would uphold it and refuse any
      relief accordingly.


           

          LORD CLARKE: (dissenting – with whom Lady Hale agrees)

 108. I agree with Lord Mance that this is an awkward case. Subject to one
      critical point, like him, I agree that Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson
      make a powerful case that the system of costs under review not only,
      as is conceded on behalf of the respondents, fulfils the legitimate
      aim of affording access to justice to appellants, but also falls
      within the wide area of discretionary judgment which rule-makers must
      be recognised as having when balancing the interests of those seeking
      access to justice and respondents faced with the additional burden of
      costs which the system could impose.

 109. I also agree with Lord Mance (at para 99) that, in striking such a
      balance, the state is entitled to look at the system as a whole, and
      the possibility of individual hard cases is not itself fatal: see the 
      Animal Defenders cases, cited by Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson in
      paras 62 and 63. Lord Mance notes the general point made by the ECtHR
      that, "the more convincing the general justifications for the general
      measure are, the less importance the Court will attach to its impact
      in the particular case". He also observes that Lord Bingham had said
      the same thing in the House of Lords and refers to James v United
      Kingdom (1986) 8 EHRR 123.

 110. As Lord Mance observes at para 100, in MGN Ltd v United Kingdom 
      (2011) 53 EHRR 5, the ECtHR was nonetheless persuaded, after an
      examination of the system and of the flaws in it identified by Sir
      Rupert Jackson and accepted by the Government, that, despite its
      legitimate aim to promote access to justice, it operated
      disproportionately in the context of claims for defamation, because
      of its effect on the right to freedom of expression protected under
      article 10 of the Convention. As I see it, the question is whether
      that decision can properly be distinguished from the issue in this
      appeal on the footing that there is here no competing interest
      comparable to freedom of expression. Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson
      say that it can. I respectfully disagree. In my opinion, the
      principles identified by the ECtHR apply to the facts of this case,
      where the respondents are relying upon their own right of access to
      justice and to a fair trial under article 6 and/or their right to
      protection of their property under paragraph 1 of protocol 1 to the
      Convention ("A1P1").

          The case for the respondents

 111. Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson summarise the respondents' case at
      paras 42 to 49 as follows. For ease of reference I set their case out
      here in much the same way. The system unjustifiably interferes with
      the article 6 and A1P1 Convention rights of "non-rich" respondents
      who unsuccessfully contest litigation instituted by appellants who
      had the benefit of CFA agreements and ATE insurance. In his Review of
      Civil Litigation Sir Rupert Jackson identified a number of what he
      described as flaws, which were summarised by the ECtHR at paras 207
      to 210 of its judgment in MGN v United Kingdom. They were (i) the
      lack of focus of the regime and the lack of any qualifying
      requirements for appellants who would be allowed to enter into a CFA;
      (ii) the absence of any incentive for appellants to control the
      incurring of legal costs and the fact that judges assessed costs only
      at the end of the case when it was too late to control costs that had
      been spent; (iii) the "blackmail" or "chilling" effect of the regime
      which drove parties to settle early despite good prospects of a
      defence; and (iv) the fact that the regime gave the opportunity to
      "cherry pick" winning cases to conduct on CFAs. At para 217, the
      ECtHR concluded that:

              "… the court considers that the depth and nature of the flaws
              in the system, highlighted in convincing detail by the public
              consultation process, and accepted in important respects by
              the Ministry of Justice, are such that the court can conclude
              that the impugned scheme exceeded even the broad margin of
              appreciation to be accorded to the state in respect of
              general measures pursuing social and economic interests."

      The flaws were thus regarded by the ECtHR as sufficiently serious to
      lead it to conclude that the system was incompatible with article 10
      of the Convention. The same reasoning necessarily requires the court
      to hold that the system was also incompatible with article 6 and
      A1P1.

 112. The system was arbitrary. It singled out from the class of
      unsuccessful litigants a subset of those who happened to have been
      opposed by CFA/ATE-funded litigants and imposed on that subset the
      burden of funding other unsuccessful cases which did not involve them
      at all. The real vice of the system lay in the CPD, which, so far as
      relevant, is quoted by Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson in para 25
      above. Paragraph 11.7 based the assessment of CFA uplifts and ATE
      premiums exclusively on the ex ante perspective of the CFA/ATE party;
      and para 11.9 expressly disallowed any reduction on the basis that
      the overall total of base costs and uplifts appeared to be
      disproportionate. Decisions on uplift therefore disregarded the
      financial circumstances of the payer, the importance to the payer of
      fighting the case and the reasonableness of his decision to fight.

 113. The system was not redeemed by the fact that costs were subject to
      assessment at the end of the proceedings. By that stage, it was too
      late to control what was being spent. Nor is it an answer to say that
      the court had the power to cap the costs of a CFA-funded and ATE
      insurance-protected party at an early stage.

 114. The system failed when tested against the questions identified by
      Lord Reed in Bank Mellat (No 2), at para 74, which are quoted by Lord
      Neuberger and Lord Dyson at para 30 above. It is instructive to ask:
      could a system of private funding of litigation for the non-rich have
      been adopted which was less intrusive of payers' fundamental rights
      without unacceptably compromising the achievement of its objective?
      There must be an affirmative answer to this question. Apart from the
      current LASPO scheme, examples of less intrusive schemes are: (i) a
      levy on all adverse costs payments by unsuccessful litigants could
      have funded the payment of additional liabilities under a modified
      version of the 1999 Act system; (ii) the system could have been
      limited to claims against defined groups, such as insured, or large
      corporations, large organisations, or public bodies; and (iii) the
      system could have incorporated provisions requiring consideration of
      all the circumstances including (a) the proportionality of the total
      of base costs and uplifts and premiums and (b) those of the payer
      (such as his means, whether he was insured, the importance of
      fighting the case and his reasonableness in fighting the case).

 115. In order to render the system compatible with article 6 (and A1P1) of
      the Convention, all that is required is to read para 11.9 down in
      accordance with section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998 so as to
      provide a system incorporating the provisions set out at (iii) in
      para 114 above.

          Discussion

 116. The critical point in this case to my mind is that in the system
      under review some classes of defendant were treated differently from
      others. Professor Zuckerman put the point with his usual clarity in
      the third edition of his book on Civil Procedure in 2013 at para
      27.315 in the context of his discussion of the decision of the ECtHR
      in MGN v United Kingdom:

              "The incompatibility of the CFA legislation with ECHR article
              6 was not directly considered in the Campbell case [in the
              House of Lords]. Lord Hoffmann touched on the point when he
              said that in relation to personal injury actions arising out
              of road accidents it was legitimate for Parliament to adopt a
              strategy of shifting the burden of funding that type of
              litigation from the State to unsuccessful respondents. The
              legitimacy of such strategy, however, depends on the fairness
              of the distribution of the advantages and disadvantages
              created by the CFA policy. In personal injury actions arising
              from road accidents, the burden of CFA success fees falls on
              insurance companies, who in turn are able to spread it
              amongst all policy holders, many of whom may be poor.
              Furthermore, CFAs were not confined to cases where the
              burdens and benefits could be aggregated in this way. It
              could be said that it is neither legitimate nor proportionate
              to adopt a policy that increases access to justice to one
              litigant by means of burdening others with the risk of having
              to pay twice the reasonable and proportionate costs of their
              adversaries and who cannot pass the risk to others nor afford
              to shoulder it on their own.

              The last point raises an issue of equality of arms. Equality
              of arms requires that both parties should be afforded an
              equal and reasonable opportunity to advance their respective
              cases under conditions that do not substantially advantage or
              disadvantage either side. Yet, an individual defendant
              without the benefit of a CFA is in a worse position than the
              CFA claimant because he is exposed to the risk of having to
              pay as much as twice the claimant's reasonable and
              proportionate costs. The way in which the success fee is
              calculated compounds the inequality and the unfairness
              because the magnitude of the 'reasonable' success fee is in
              inverse proportion to the strength of the claimant's case.
              The riskier the claimant's case, the greater the success fee
              that his lawyer may legitimately charge. It follows that the
              stronger the defendant's prospect of success and the more he
              has reason to insist on his rights the more he would have to
              pay the claimant by way of success fee, in the event that the
              claimant wins."

 117. In my opinion those points have great force. As I see it, the system
      was unfairly discriminatory against some classes of respondent by
      comparison with others. I can understand that it might be just to
      introduce some such system where the respondents are part of a class
      of respondents who are frequent litigators such that a system which
      provides the rough with the smooth may be justifiable. An example
      would be respondents who have relevant liability insurance because
      liability insurers are not concerned so much with the result in the
      particular case as with balancing the premium income over a long
      period. Similar considerations may apply to commercial entities of
      which the same may be said. They may also apply to organs of the
      state. Although (for the most part) they do not have the protection
      of the Human Rights Act, in the nature of things they are respondents
      in many classes of case. Save in such cases, it seems to me to be
      discriminatory and disproportionate to burden uninsured respondents
      with costs which vastly exceed the fair and reasonable costs incurred
      by the claimant in order to encourage solicitors to act for other
      appellants against other respondents against whom the claims may
      fail.

 118. It is a striking feature of a CFA that it is available to rich as
      well as poor appellants, as the House of Lords held in Campbell v
      Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [2005] UKHL 61, [2005] 1 WLR 3394. So,
      when it was made possible to recover the success fee (and ATE
      premium) from respondents, it was not only a means of providing
      access to justice (ie through lawyers) for those who could not
      otherwise afford it but also a risk free means of providing access to
      lawyers for those who could afford to fund it in other ways. There
      are cases in which appellants are richer than respondents. The
      claimant always had a choice about whether to go to court, whereas
      once that choice was made, the defendant had no choice not to take
      part. He must give in, negotiate or fight. Moreover, if the claimant
      had ATE insurance, which meant that his chances were better (usually
      substantially better) than evens, the defendant would have little or
      no prospect of obtaining ATE insurance because his chances would be
      unlikely to be so rated.

 119. The facts of this case bear much of this out, as can be seen from
      Lord Neuberger's description of the costs position in this case,
      reported as Coventry v Lawrence (No 2) [2014] UKSC 46, at paras 32 to
      39. He said this at paras 32 to 34:

              "32. The final issue arises out of the judge's order for
              costs, namely that the respondents should pay 60% of the
              appellants' costs. The appellants' costs at first instance
              consisted of three components, as permitted by the Courts and
              Legal Services Act 1990 as amended by sections 27-31 in Part
              II of the Access to Justice Act 1999. The first was the 'base
              costs', ie what their lawyers charged on the traditional
              basis, which was, in crude terms, calculated on an hourly
              rate and the costs of disbursements. The second component was
              the success fee (or uplift) to which the lawyers were
              entitled, because they were providing their services on a
              conditional fee (or no win no fee) basis. The third component
              was the so-called ATE premium, a sum which is payable to an
              insurer who agreed to underwrite the appellants' potential
              liability to the respondents for their costs if the
              respondents had won. The appellants' base costs amounted to
              £398,000; the success fee, which (we will assume) was at the
              maximum permitted level of 100%, amounted to £319,000-odd (as
              the uplift does not apply to every item of costs), and the
              ATE premium was apparently about £350,000.

              33. Accordingly, if the respondents had been liable for the
              whole of the appellants' costs up to the date the judge made
              the order, they would have had to pay the appellants around
              £1,067,000. As it is they are liable for over £640,000.

              34. These figures are very disturbing."

 120. Lord Neuberger (with whom Lord Sumption and I agreed) then, in paras
      35 and 36, expressed grave concern about the base costs in a case
      like this. He added:

              "37. The amount of the base costs in this case is however
              dwarfed by the total potentially recoverable costs, which are
              nearly three times as much. The figures illustrate the malign
              influence of the amendments made to the 1990 Act by Part II
              of the 1999 Act, and as implemented through CPR rule 44 and
              the Practice Direction supplementing CPR Part 44, now
              fortunately repealed and replaced by the provisions of Part 2
              of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act
              2012, following Sir Rupert Jackson's Review of Civil
              Litigation Costs (2010), referred to above. As Sir Rupert
              pointed out in his Review, and as is explained in Zuckerman
              on Civil Procedure Principles and Practice, 3rd ed (2013),
              the system introduced in 1999 had a number of unique and
              regrettable features, four of which are worth mentioning for
              present purposes. First, claimants had no interest whatever
              in the level of base costs, success fee or ATE premium which
              they agreed with their lawyers, as, if they lost they had to
              pay nothing, and if they won the costs would all be paid by
              the respondents, who, on the other hand, had no say about the
              costs (other than retrospectively on an assessment).
              Secondly, in many cases, unsuccessful respondents found
              themselves paying, in addition to the whole of their own
              costs, three times the claimants' real costs. Thirdly, while
              proportionality had a part to play when assessing the
              recoverability of base costs (albeit a limited part: see 
              Home Office v Lownds (Practice Note) [2002] 1 WLR 2450), it
              was excluded from consideration in relation to the recovery
              of success fee or ATE premium (which were simply required to
              be reasonable): see Practice Direction supplementing CPR Part
              44 paras 11.7-11.10. Fourthly, the stronger the respondents'
              case, the greater their liability for costs would be if they
              lost, as the size of the success fee and the ATE premium
              should have reflected the appellants' prospects of success."

 121. Lord Neuberger then briefly summarised in para 38 the case which Mr
      McCracken QC has advanced before us. I appreciate that the majority
      do not accept the respondents' case as summarised above. However, as
      already stated, my own view is that the system described above, as
      applied to respondents such as the respondents in this case, is
      discriminatory, disproportionate and unfair and infringes their right
      to a fair trial under article 6. In my opinion it also breaches their
      rights under A1P1, although I do not think that adds anything
      significant to their case under article 6. In these circumstances I
      am not surprised that Sir Rupert was critical of the system in his
      Review and or that Parliament has now changed the law.

 122. Nor am I surprised that there has been significant extra-judicial
      adverse comment about the scheme. In particular, Sir Anthony May, who
      was then President of the Queen's Bench Division, said this in
      Cardiff on 19 June 2009 in a passage cited by Sir Rupert Jackson in
      his final Report at pp 97-98:

              "Is it right in principle that a losing party should have to
              pay an additional amount, in excess of the proper and
              reasonable costs of the litigation, to cover the winning
              party's lawyer's costs of losing other cases on behalf of
              other clients? Is it in principle right that an eventual
              losing party to litigation should be at risk of paying a
              greater uplift if he has a strongly arguable case he
              nevertheless loses, whereas, if he has a rotten case, the
              justifiable uplift will be less? So too with the after the
              event insurance premium. This has insured the winning party
              against the costs he would have been ordered to pay if he had
              lost, including the costs he would have paid to the eventual
              losing party. Is it right in principle that a party to
              litigation should be ordered to pay costs referable to an
              insurance policy which would have covered his own costs if he
              had been successful? I do not here question the
              appropriateness of agreements providing for success fees nor
              the sense of insuring against potential liabilities in costs.
              What I do question is whether the other party should in
              principle be ordered to pay these elements. After all, we do
              start from the position that the base costs are the proper
              reasonable costs of conducting the litigation. Why should the
              losing party additionally finance the costs of other
              litigation of which he is not a party or of an insurance
              premium which would have relieved his opponent of his costs
              if his own defence had succeeded? And the stronger his own
              defence, the more he has to pay if nevertheless he loses. He
              may have been negligent or in breach of contract, but his
              negligence or breach of contract did not generate these
              expenses."

      I agree with Sir Anthony May, who has great experience of civil
      litigation of all kinds.

          The decision of the ECtHR in MGN v United Kingdom

 123. The decision of the ECtHR in MGNv United Kingdom is to my mind of
      considerable importance. Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson have set out
      the facts at para 50 above. As they observe, in defending the CFA
      scheme, the UK Government advanced arguments similar to those that
      have been advanced by the Secretary of State (as well as by the
      appellants and some of the interveners) in the present case. The
      ECtHR held that the requirement to pay the success fees constituted
      an interference with the defendant's article 10 rights. The central
      issue was whether the UK authorities had struck a "fair balance"
      between freedom of expression protected by article 10 and an
      individual's right of access to court protected by article 6 (para
      199).

 124. At paras 206 to 217 the ECtHR accepted that the scheme suffered from
      the four flaws identified in the Jackson report and set out above. At
      para 51 above Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson correctly recognise that
      these flaws were of general application and not confined to
      defamation and breach of privacy litigation. In this connection they
      quote the passage from para 217 set out at para 111 above.

 125. I recognise the point made in para 52 above that the context in which
      the ECtHR made those criticisms was its concern about the effect of
      the scheme in defamation and privacy cases: see paras 211 to 215. I
      also recognise that the right of freedom of expression is always
      given particular weight by the ECtHR and (as the ECtHR said at para
      201) that the most careful scrutiny is called for when measures are
      capable of discouraging the participation of the press in debates
      over matters of legitimate public concern. I further recognise that
      it was in that context that the ECtHR concluded that a fair balance
      had not been struck between the article 10 rights of defendant
      publishers and the article 6 rights of appellants who allege
      defamation or breach of privacy.

 126. The question is whether the same applies to the relative rights of
      appellants seeking access to justice and a fair trial under article 6
      and those of respondents seeking a fair trial under article 6 and the
      recognition of their rights under A1P1. I respectfully disagree that
      the balance to be struck in this class of case is of a wholly
      different character. As Lord Mance says in para 102, in para 79 Lord
      Neuberger and Lord Dyson discount any suggestion that the scheme in
      force from 1999 to 2013 was incompatible because it did not take
      account of the paying party's financial circumstances. They say that
      the financial position of the paying party has never been a relevant
      factor in determining the assessment of reasonable and proportionate
      costs. However, as Lord Mance points out, in para 83 they accept
      that, in a number of individual cases, it might be said to have
      interfered with a defendant's right of access to justice.
      Nonetheless, they conclude that, viewed as a whole, it was rational
      and coherent, and not incompatible with either article 6 or A1P1.

 127. Save that I would go further, I agree with Lord Mance at para 103
      that, while freedom of expression is a particularly powerful interest
      under the Convention, the interest of any defendant in being able to
      defend himself or itself in litigation, at a reasonable and
      proportionate cost is also one of some weight; and it certainly
      engages (as he understands Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson to accept) a
      balancing exercise, when set against the countervailing interest that
      appellants should have the access to justice which the system was
      designed to give. The respect in which I would go further is that it
      appears to me that, just as a claimant is entitled to a fair trial,
      so too is a defendant. It is unfairly to diminish that right to say
      that it is merely entitled to some weight. It is the duty of the
      court to ensure that both parties have a fair trial.

 128. As Lord Mance says at para 104, the strength of the present
      respondents' case lies in their claim to be individuals or small
      undertakings carrying on modest businesses without insurance and
      faced with one-off litigation, which has involved them in
      eye-catchingly large costs exposure. I agree that precisely how
      compelling this claim is, as Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson note (para
      85), untested. However, as I understand it, their case has been
      rejected on the basis that is bound to fail.

 129. It is true that previous challenges to the scheme have failed but the
      points now taken were not determined in any of them. To my mind, so
      far as it applies to the class of defendant concerned in this case,
      the scheme is discriminatory and disproportionate and disregards
      their rights. So far as I can see, the Government at no stage
      considered the plight of respondents such as these. In MGN v United
      Kingdom, having set out the facts, the ECtHR reached these
      conclusions in paras 219 and 220:

              "219. In such circumstances, the court considers that the
              requirement that the applicant pay success fees to the
              claimant was disproportionate having regard to the legitimate
              aims sought to be achieved and exceeded even the broad margin
              of appreciation accorded to the Government in such matters.

              220. Accordingly, the court finds that there has been a
              violation of article 10 of the Convention."

      I respectfully agree.

          Conclusions

 130. I agree with Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson (at para 53) that, of the
      four flaws identified by Sir Rupert Jackson, it is the third flaw
      that lies at the heart of this case. One way of describing it is as
      imposing a costs burden on opposing parties which is excessive and in
      some cases amounts to a denial of justice. In para 54 they set out
      what Lord Neuberger had described as four "unique and regrettable
      features" of the scheme on which the respondents also rely in support
      of their case. As they say, to some extent these features overlap
      with the four flaws. The first feature was that appellants had no
      interest in the level of fees which they agreed to pay their lawyers.
      The second was that in many cases unsuccessful respondents found
      themselves paying, in addition to their own costs, three times the
      appellants' "real" costs. The third was that proportionality was
      excluded from consideration in relation to the recovery of the
      success fee or ATE premium. The fourth was that the stronger the
      respondents' case, the greater their liability costs would be if they
      lost, since the size of the success fee and the premium should have
      reflected the appellants' prospects of success.

 131. I accept that the question is not whether the system was unfair or
      had flaws. It is whether it was a disproportionate way of achieving
      the legitimate aim. In my opinion, it plainly was because it did not
      treat all respondents in the same way but chose a particular class of
      respondents on whom to impose liabilities far beyond the bounds of
      what was reasonable or proportionate.

 132. As Lord Sumption observed in Bank Mellat (No 2) at para 25, "a
      measure may respond to a real problem but nevertheless be irrational
      or disproportionate by reason of its being discriminatory in some
      respect that is incapable of objective justification". In my opinion
      this is such a case.

          Legitimate expectation and remedy

 133. The majority place weight on what they call the "legitimate
      expectation" of litigants and lawyers that courts will uphold the
      legality of the costs regime around which they have contracted. They
      say that, even if the system is incompatible with article 6 and A1P1,
      litigants' and lawyers' legitimate expectation that successful
      appellants would receive a costs order covering the success fee and
      ATE insurance premium should be weighed in the balance so that a
      remedy of reading down the provisions so as to be compatible with
      respondents' Convention rights is not appropriate: Lord Neuberger and
      Lord Dyson, para 89; Lord Mance, para 106. The appellants before us
      argued that their expectation that they would receive such a costs
      order was a "legitimate expectation" which was a protected possession
      under A1P1. Presumably (though they do not say so) the members of the
      majority intend to use the term "legitimate expectation" in that
      sense.

 134. The question is what order the court must make. To my mind the answer
      is clear. By section 6 of the Human Rights Act, the court must not
      act incompatibly with a Convention right. It is the court's duty to
      balance these competing rights as part of the balancing exercise and
      determine the proper way forward. Insofar as the expectations of
      litigants and their lawyers are relevant to the article 6 balancing
      exercise, I consider that they are one factor only and cannot render
      proportionate the discriminatory treatment of the particular classes
      of defendant I have already discussed.

 135. As the majority observe, legitimate expectation may be relevant on
      the issue of remedy. It strikes me that it may be relevant in this
      way. When deciding what order to make in light of the facts at the
      present day, considerations of legitimate expectation should cause
      the court to go back to the balancing exercise it has already
      undertaken when evaluating the scheme itself. The court would then
      take account of the parties' legitimate expectations in a new
      balancing exercise and decide whether to maintain its previous view.
      Considerations tending to the conclusion that that the scheme is
      still incompatible might include the following: (i) the ECtHR was
      untroubled by this concern in MGN v United Kingdom; (ii) the
      legitimacy of an expectation that the Government would enforce a
      scheme which breaches the Convention rights of others must be very
      limited indeed; (iii) the application of A1P1 to the question of
      whether a superior court should feel able to disturb settled case-law
      is an area where the court should act with great caution; (iv) as a
      matter of fact the scheme was heavily criticised from its inception,
      so that litigants must have known that there was an issue under
      article 6; (v) since it is the court's duty to act compatibly with
      the Convention, the court should not make an excessive costs order
      which directly infringes a respondent's rights, even though this may
      have a deleterious effect on the claimant; (vi) it may not have such
      an effect because the solicitors may not enforce their rights against
      the appellants; and (vii) the appellants may have rights against the
      United Kingdom. If all these points are borne in mind when striking a
      balance between the rights of the parties, the correct conclusion is
      that respondents' article 6 rights are still breached because leaving
      the scheme in place is still not proportionate. I would add by way of
      footnote that it is surely relevant to observe that a respondent is
      in no way responsible for any legitimate expectation that a claimant
      might have had.

 136. The question of what precise order the court should make then arises.
      It appears to me to be at least arguable that CPD 11.9 can be read
      down as submitted on behalf of the respondents. However, I recognise
      that Lord Neuberger and Lord Dyson say that it cannot. If that is
      correct, the appropriate remedy would to my mind be to strike down
      CPD 11.9, which is not of course primary (or even secondary)
      legislation, as being contrary to the Convention. There is scope for
      further argument on these questions and, if it were relevant I would
      be willing to receive further argument on them, but I recognise that
      in present circumstances there would be no point in such argument
      because I am in a minority.

          Conclusion

 137. For all these reasons, in respectful disagreement with the majority,
      I would allow the appeal.