          Summary


          Trinty Term
          [2013] UKSC 49
          On appeal from: [2012] EWCA Civ 1383


          JUDGMENT

              R (on the application of AA) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of
              State for the Home Department (Respondent)

          before


          Lord Neuberger, President
          Lord Clarke
          Lord Wilson
          Lord Carnwath
          Lord Toulson

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          10 July 2013

          Heard on 7 and 8 May 2013

      Appellant
      Stephen Knafler QC
      Shu Shin Luh
      (Instructed by SouthWest Law) 	  	Respondent
      Robin Tam QC
      Susan Chan
      (Instructed by Treasury Solicitor)

          LORD TOULSON (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Clarke and Lord
          Wilson agree)

   1. The Immigration Act 1971, Schedule 2, paragraph 16(2) ("paragraph
      16"), gives power to immigration officers acting on behalf of the
      Secretary of State to detain a person if there is reasonable ground
      to suspect that he is liable to be removed as an illegal entrant,
      pending a decision whether to give removal directions or the
      implementation of removal directions.

   2. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
      ("section 55") imposes duties regarding the welfare of children on
      the Secretary of State and on immigration officers in all immigration
      matters.

   3. The issue on this appeal is the effect of section 55 on the legality
      of the appellant's detention under paragraph 16 over a period of 13
      days. At the time of the detention the Secretary of State acted in
      the mistaken but reasonable belief that he was aged over 18. It is
      now an agreed fact that he was born on 1 February 1993 and so was
      aged 17. If his true age had been known he would not have been
      detained, because his detention would have been contrary to the
      Secretary of State's policy in relation to minors. The appellant's
      case is that the fact of his age made his detention unlawful on the
      proper construction of section 55, and that the Secretary of State's
      reasonable belief that he was over 18 is no defence to his claim.

          Facts

   4. The appellant was born in Afghanistan. He arrived in the United
      Kingdom on 8 October 2008, concealed in a lorry. He was caught and
      arrested. He said that he was aged 14 and claimed asylum. On the next
      day an age assessment was carried out by social workers from the
      children's services department of Hampshire County Council
      ("Hampshire"). They concluded that he was over 19 and so reported to
      the Secretary of State. Thereafter the appellant was granted
      temporary admission and released from immigration detention.

   5. On 6 November 2008 the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
      asylum claim and made a decision to remove him as an illegal entrant.
      On 1 March 2010 the First Tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
      Chamber) dismissed the appeal. In his determination the immigration
      judge found that he was satisfied that the appellant was aged over
      18.

   6. In April 2010 solicitors for the appellant wrote to the Secretary of
      State stating that they were instructed to challenge Hampshire's age
      assessment, which they did not consider had complied with the
      guidance on the conduct of age assessments given by Stanley Burnton J
      in R (B) v Merton London Borough Council [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin), 
      [2003] 4 All ER 280. The solicitors also asked Hampshire to re-assess
      the appellant's age. Since the appellant was then living in the
      Cardiff area, Hampshire suggested that Cardiff City Council
      ("Cardiff") should be asked to carry out a re-assessment. Cardiff
      agreed but there was a period of delay.

   7. On 7 July 2010 the appellant was detained under paragraph 16. On the
      same day the Secretary of State set directions for his removal to
      Afghanistan on 20 July 2010.

   8. On 20 July 2010, in the High Court at Cardiff, the appellant issued a
      claim form for judicial review against Cardiff, Hampshire and the
      Secretary of State. Among other forms of relief the appellant
      claimed:

              i) an order quashing Hampshire's age assessment carried out
              on 9 October 2008;

              ii) an order requiring Cardiff to carry out an age
              assessment;

              iii) an order requiring Cardiff to provide suitable
              age-appropriate support and accommodation to the appellant,
              pursuant to the Children Act 1989, pending completion of the
              age assessment and the judicial review proceedings;

              iv) a declaration that the Secretary of State's detention of
              the appellant and issue of removal directions were unlawful;

              v) an order staying the implementation of the removal
              directions until further order;

              vi) damages.

   9. On the same day Judge Bidder QC, sitting as a deputy High Court
      judge, granted temporary relief to the appellant. He ordered that his
      removal should be stayed, pending the outcome of his application for
      permission for judicial review, and that in the meantime he should be
      released from immigration detention and provided with support and
      accommodation by Cardiff.

  10. On 6 August 2010 Cardiff notified the Secretary of State that its
      social services asylum team had carried out a fresh assessment in
      accordance with the Merton guidelines and accepted that his date of
      birth was 1 February 1993. The Secretary of State in turn accepted
      the fresh assessment.

  11. The appellant's application for permission to apply for judicial
      review against Hampshire and Cardiff was withdrawn by consent on
      terms that Cardiff agreed to treat him as a child under the Children
      Act 1989, so providing him with accommodation under section 20 and
      associated support under sections 22 and 23.

  12. The appellant continued with his application for permission to apply
      for judicial review against the Secretary of State. On 7 March 2011
      Blake J dismissed the application after an oral hearing: [2011] EWHC
      1216 (Admin). He described the appellant's argument as intermingling
      matters of policy with the requirements of the statutory regime for
      detention. Paragraph 16 permitted the detention of children if the
      statutory conditions were met, but there were strong policy reasons
      against such detention unless it was necessary in all the
      circumstances. He continued at para 13:

              "Insofar as the applicant relies upon policy, then in my
              judgment the application of policy depends upon the
              assessment of facts made by the decision maker at the
              material time. At the time this applicant was detained the
              Secretary of State knew that Hampshire had assessed him to be
              over 18 in an assessment which they claimed was Merton
              -compliant. Secondly he knew that the immigration judge,
              acting on all material available to him in February 2010, had
              reached a similar conclusion not entirely dependant upon the
              approach of Hampshire. Thirdly, no discrete submissions had
              been made to the Secretary of State as to why the immigration
              judge and/or Hampshire assessment was wrong in fact."

  13. He held that in the circumstances the Secretary of State had no
      reason to have reached a conclusion contrary to that of the other
      authorities.

  14. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
      Appeal. After considering the application on paper, on 14 June 2011
      Sir Richard Buxton granted the appellant limited permission to apply
      for judicial review, and directed that the case should be retained in
      the Court of Appeal, on the following ground:

              "It is … arguable that, on the basis of the approach of the
              Supreme Court in Croydon, the lawfulness of the Secretary of
              State's decision should be assessed on the basis that,
              whatever the understanding at the time, the applicant was a
              child and should have been treated as such, including not
              being removed from the United Kingdom and therefore not being
              detained pending removal."

  15. The reference to Croydon was to R (A) v Croydon London Borough
      Council [2009] UKSC 8, [2009] 1 WLR 2557. Sir Richard Buxton agreed
      with Blake J that it was not arguable that the Secretary of State had
      acted unreasonably in proceeding on the basis that the appellant was
      over 18, and he refused permission to apply for judicial review on
      that wider ground. A subsequent oral application by the appellant to
      widen the grounds of challenge was refused by Arden LJ. His
      substantive claim was dismissed by the full court for reasons given
      in a judgment by Arden LJ, with which Davis LJ and Baron J agreed: 
      [2012] EWCA Civ 1383.

          Section 55 of the 2009 Act

  16. Section 55 provides:

              "(1) The Secretary of State must make arrangements for
              ensuring that -

                  (a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are
                  discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                  promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (b) any services provided by another person pursuant to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State and
                  relate to the discharge of a function mentioned in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.

              (2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

                  (a) any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;

                  b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the
                  Immigration Acts on an immigration officer; …

              (3) A person exercising any of those functions must, in
              exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to
              the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of
              subsection (1).

              …

              (6) In this section

              'Children' means persons who are under the age of 18; …"

  17. Section 55 came into force on 2 November 2009. In the same month
      guidance was published by the Home Office, jointly with the
      Department for Children, Schools and Families, under the title "Every
      Child Matters". Its stated object was to set out the key arrangements
      for safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children, as they apply
      both generally to public bodies who deal with children and
      specifically to the UK Border Agency. Its language was the language
      of general principles rather than particular rules. Among the general
      principles it stated:

              "2.6 The UK Border Agency acknowledges the status and
              importance of the following:

                  The European Convention for the Protection of Human
                  Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the International
                  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
                  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the EU
                  Reception Conditions Directive, the Council of Europe
                  Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings,
                  and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. The UK
                  Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
                  instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its
                  functions as expressed in UK domestic legislation and
                  policies.

  18. 7 The UK Border Agency must also act according to the following
      principles:

                      o Every child matters even if they are someone
                        subject to immigration control.

                      o In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights
                        of the Child the best interests of the child will
                        be a primary consideration (although not
                        necessarily the only consideration) when making
                        decisions affecting children. …"

  19. The document recognised that the guidance contained in it could not
      cover every situation and that staff would need to use their judgment
      and refer to detailed operational guidance applicable to specific
      areas.

  20. Operational guidance on the use of detention powers is contained in
      Enforcement Instructions and Guidance ("EIG") published by the
      Secretary of State. Paragraph 55.9.3.1 states:

              "Sometimes people over the age of 18 claim to be children in
              order to prevent their detention or effect their release once
              detained. Information on the policy and procedures concerning
              persons whose ages have been disputed is available on the
              website at [reference omitted].

              UK Border Agency will accept an individual as under 18
              (including those who have previously claimed to be an adult)
              unless one or more of the following criteria apply:

                      o there is credible and clear documentary evidence
                        that they are 18 years of age or over;

                      o a full 'Merton-compliant' age assessment by social
                        services is available stating that they are 18
                        years of age or over. (Note that assessments
                        completed by social services emergency duty teams
                        are not acceptable evidence of age);

                      o their physical appearance/demeanour very strongly
                        indicates that they are significantly over 18 years
                        of age and no other credible evidence exists to the
                        contrary.

                  …

              It is UK Border Agency policy not to detain children other
              than in the most exceptional circumstances. …"

  21. More detailed directions and guidance on assessing age are given in a
      departmental document entitled "Assessing Age" (June 2011). This sets
      out the policy and procedures to be followed when an applicant for
      asylum claims to be a child, with little or no supporting evidence,
      and the claim is doubted by the Border Agency.

  22. The document emphasises the need to consider all the evidence, since
      no single assessment technique or combination of techniques is likely
      to determine the applicant's age with precision. It states that at
      the stage of the initial age assessment, if there is little evidence
      to support the applicant's claimed age and if their physical
      appearance/demeanour very strongly suggests that they are
      significantly over 18, they are to be treated at that stage as an
      adult, but the decision must be reviewed if there is relevant new
      evidence. All other applicants are to be treated as children until a
      careful assessment of their age has been completed.

  23. The document contains particular guidance on the use of local
      authority age assessments. It explains that local authorities will
      often have a duty to provide accommodation and support to an
      unaccompanied asylum seeking child under provisions of the Children
      Act 1989. As part of its duties, the local authority will normally
      conduct an assessment of the applicant's age in order to determine
      eligibility for children's services. The document summarises the 
      Merton guidelines and states:

              "5.2 Case owners should give considerable weight to the
              findings of age made by local authorities, recognising the
              particular expertise they have through working with children.
              In cases where the local authority's assessment is the only
              source of information about the applicant's age – their
              assessment will normally be accepted as decisive evidence.

              Nevertheless, case owners should carefully consider the
              findings of the local authority and discuss the matter with
              them in appropriate circumstances, such as where the findings
              are unclear; or do not seem to be supported by evidence; or
              it appears that the case is finely balanced and the applicant
              has not been given the benefit of the doubt; or that it
              appears the general principles set out in the Merton 
              judgment were not adhered to."

  24. Where there is new evidence after an initial assessment, the document
      states:

              "8.2 Case owners will normally need to review a decision on
              age if they later receive relevant new evidence (including in
              the grounds of an appeal). Where the original decision on the
              applicant's age was based on a local authority assessment,
              the local authority should normally be made aware of the new
              evidence and be invited to review their earlier decision. The
              local authority's view should be considered by the case owner
              before they reconsider the decision on age.

              If appropriate, the original decision should be
              administratively withdrawn, and a fresh decision issued to
              the applicant's legal representative or, if the applicant is
              not represented, to the applicant."

  25. Under the heading "Section 55 duty and the assessing age policy", the
      document sets out the department's reasons for believing that the
      policy complies with the requirements of the statute:

              "2.2.1 The assessing age policy has in-built safeguards to
              ensure it is compliant with the new duty, for example,
              applicants whose age has not been accepted by the Agency,
              will initially be afforded the benefit of the doubt and
              treated as children unless their physical
              appearance/demeanour very strongly suggests they are 
              significantly over 18. It is appropriate to give these
              applicants the benefit of the doubt until a further
              assessment of their age has been made, because it ensures
              that such applicants are not exposed to risks which might
              compromise their safety or welfare in the meantime. In
              particular, they will be provided with a responsible adult
              for the substantive interview, and will not be accommodated
              with adults. This is a safeguard to allow for the possibility
              that these applicants may produce evidence showing that they
              are a child or a local authority age assessment, according to 
              Merton guidelines, later assesses them to be a child.

              The policy applied to applicants whose physical
              appearance/demeanour very strongly suggests that they are 
              significantly over 18 is consistent with the new duty because
              the Agency has had regard to the need to safeguard and
              promote the welfare of children when making the initial age
              assessment. Having given the applicant the benefit of the
              doubt, they have found them to be an adult. The duty does not
              compel the Agency to treat these applicants as children.
              Thus, the same safeguards are not necessary.

              Furthermore, the Agency's policy to rely on Merton-compliant
              age assessments when making a decision on an applicant's
              disputed age, is consistent with the section 55 duty because
              the Merton guidelines ensure that proper safeguards and
              standards of enquiry and fairness are adhered to. Local
              authorities who are bound by section 11 of the Children Act
              1989 (upon which the section 55 duty is based) also rely on
              their own Merton-compliant age assessments unless and until
              they receive further evidence indicating that the applicant
              is a child."

          R (A) v Croydon London Borough Council

  26. As already mentioned, Sir Richard Buxton's reason for giving the
      appellant permission to apply for judicial review was so that the
      question could be argued whether the approach of the Supreme Court to
      the assessment of age in Croydon was equally applicable in
      determining the legality of the appellant's detention. That case
      concerned section 20(1) of the Children Act 1989, which provides:

              "Every local authority shall provide accommodation for any
              child in need within their area who appears to them to
              require accommodation …"

  27. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom and applied for asylum.
      They claimed to be aged under 18 but were assessed as over 18 by
      immigration officers. They were referred to the social services
      departments of the appropriate local authorities and interviewed by
      social workers, who also concluded that they were over 18. The local
      authorities therefore refused to provide accommodation for them under
      section 20 of the 1989 Act. They challenged the local authorities'
      decisions. The issue before the Supreme Court was whether the
      question of their age was one for the decision of the court or was
      for the decision of the local authority, subject to review on
      standard public law grounds. The court decided that it was the
      former.

  28. The court arrived at that conclusion as a simple matter of
      construction of the language of section 20. The court declined to
      read the words "who appears to them" as applying not only to the
      question of the applicant's need for accommodation, but also to the
      question whether the applicant was a child, because that was not how
      the section was drafted. On the face of the wording of the section,
      the question whether the applicant was a child was a question of fact
      for determination by the court in the event of a dispute. Faced with
      what appeared to the court to be clear wording, it was not impressed
      by other arguments put forward by the local authorities, based on the
      wider structure of the Act and practical considerations.

  29. Croydon was considered by Lang J in AAM v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2012] EWHC 2567 (QB). The claim was for damages for
      false imprisonment and breach of article 5 of the European Convention
      on Human Rights. The defendant conceded that the detention had been
      unlawful because immigration officers had wrongly applied a
      presumption that an asylum seeker who arrived clandestinely should be
      detained, but it disputed other grounds on which the claimant alleged
      that his detention was unlawful. The judgment was concerned with that
      dispute, which was thought to have a potential bearing on the
      assessment of compensation. The case bears some resemblances to the
      present case but there were also factual differences.

  30. The police were called when the claimant went into a petrol station
      asking for food. He told the police through an interpreter that he
      was 15 years old and came from Iran. He was detained and the police
      notified the social services department of the local county council.
      A social worker conducted an age assessment and concluded that he was
      over 18. The police called the Border Agency and an immigration
      officer took the decision that he should be detained.

  31. The immigration officer gave evidence before Lang J. The judge found
      that the decision to detain was unlawful because the immigration
      officer failed to ask herself the right questions or to take
      reasonable steps to acquaint herself with the information needed to
      make her decision. She did not know the requirements of a Merton
      -compliant assessment. A later re-assessment by social services
      concluded that the appellant was 17. At the trial it was accepted as
      a fact that he was 15 and that the way in which the first assessment
      had been carried out was defective.

  32. As to the proper interpretation of the policy set out in EIG
      paragraph 55.9.3.1, Lang J accepted the defendant's submission that
      it was not to be read as imposing a pre-condition that a Merton
      -compliant age assessment had been carried out. Rather, an
      immigration officer was required to make an independent evaluation
      and exercise his judgment in deciding whether or not the criteria in
      the paragraph were met. On the judge's findings, the immigration
      officer lacked the training to have done so and failed the test. Her
      factual findings were sufficient to justify the conclusion that the
      decision to detain was unlawful.

  33. However, Lang J went on to consider a further argument based on
      section 55. The argument in short was that since the claimant was
      under 18 and his welfare had not been taken into account when making
      the decision to detain, his detention was therefore in breach of
      section 55. It is not entirely clear whether this part of her
      judgment was intended to be read in the light of the factual findings
      which she had already made or was intended to apply whether or not
      the immigration officer had approached the matter properly in terms
      of the guidance in EIG 55.9.3.1.

  34. There are a number of strands to Lang J's reasoning under this head.
      First, she laid stress on the word "ensuring" in section 55(1). If
      the policy in EIG 55.9.3.1 authorised an immigration officer to make
      a decision on a "reasonable belief" that the person was an adult, and
      thereby allowed for the possibility of the immigration officer being
      mistaken, then the policy did not "ensure" that the welfare principle
      was complied with, as required by section 55. The alternative was
      that the policy only authorised an immigration officer to treat a
      person as an adult if he was in fact an adult. On that basis the
      policy complied with section 55, but, if the immigration officer made
      a mistake, there would then have been a breach of the policy.

  35. I have some difficulty in following how this part of the judgment
      fits with the earlier part. The judge had previously concluded that
      EIG 55.9.3.1 required the immigration officer to make an independent
      evaluation and exercise his judgment in deciding whether the criteria
      of the paragraph were met. The later passage appears to make a 
      Merton-compliant age assessment a precondition of a valid decision
      under paragraph 55.9.3.1, which the judge had earlier rejected as a
      proposition.

  36. Secondly, Lang J referred to the guidance in Every Child Matters with
      its stress (as the title of the document suggests) on the need to
      take into account the welfare of the child in every case involving a
      child.

  37. Thirdly, she referred to ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2011] UKSC 4, [2011] 2 AC 166, at paras 23 to 25,
      where Lady Hale emphasised the requirement in article 3.1 of the
      United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 ("UNCRC")
      that in all actions concerning children taken by public authorities,
      including courts, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
      consideration.

  38. Fourthly, Lang J referred to a number of decisions in the
      Administrative Court where failures by decision makers to have regard
      to the welfare principle when individual decisions were made had led
      to successful legal challenges.

  39. Lang J concluded:

              "128 Unfortunately, the immigration officers did not have
              regard to the claimant's status as a child, and the need to
              safeguard and promote his welfare as a child, when they made
              the decision to detain him, because they were under the
              mistaken belief that he was not a child.

              129 However, he was in fact a child, within the meaning of
              the definition of 'child' in sub-section (6), and it is not
              possible to interpret this definition as if Parliament had
              included the words 'appears to be a child' or 'is reasonably
              believed to be a child'. Applying the analysis adopted by the
              House of Lords in R (A) v Croydon London Borough Council 
              [2009] UKSC 8; [2009] 1 WLR 2557, per Lady Hale at para 27:

                  '… the question whether a person is a 'child' is a
                  different kind of question. There is a right or a wrong
                  answer. It may be difficult to determine what that answer
                  is. The decision makers may have to do their best on the
                  basis of less than perfect or conclusive evidence. But
                  that is true of many questions of fact which regularly
                  come before the courts. That does not prevent them from
                  being questions for the courts rather than for other
                  kinds of decision makers.'

              130 My conclusion is that, by failing to have regard to the
              need to safeguard and promote his welfare as a child, the
              immigration officers erred in law, rendering the decision to
              detain unlawful."

  40. The Court of Appeal in the present case distinguished Croydon and 
      AAM. Arden LJ emphasised that in this case prior to the appellant's
      detention there had been not only an assessment by Hampshire but a
      determination by an immigration judge that he was aged over 18. The
      decision to detain was lawfully made under paragraph 16 and was not
      rendered retrospectively unlawful by the later evidence, accepted by
      the Secretary of State, that he was in fact under 18.

          Discussion

  41. From ancient times the common law provided two remedies for a person
      who was unlawfully detained – a writ of habeas corpus to obtain his
      release and a writ of trespass to the person (one form of which is
      false imprisonment) to obtain compensation.

  42. The burden is on the person detaining another to justify the grounds
      of detention, and liability for false imprisonment is strict.
      Reasonable belief in a power to detain is not ordinarily a defence at
      common law, although there are various examples of statutory powers
      to detain on reasonable suspicion of certain matters (for example,
      the power of a police officer to detain a person who he reasonably
      suspects of having committed an arrestable offence).

  43. With rare exceptions (the most notorious example being the decision
      of the majority of the House of Lords in Liversidge v Anderson 
      [1942] AC 206), the courts have looked with strictness on statutory
      powers of executive detention. These principles are all too well
      established to require citation of authorities.

  44. In the present case the Secretary of State relies for justification
      of the appellant's detention from 7 to 20 July 2010 on the statutory
      power of detention created by paragraph 16. There is no dispute that
      the appellant came within that paragraph, but the appellant contends
      that the decision to detain him was unlawful because it was made in
      breach of section 55.

  45. I accept that if there was a material breach of section 55, it would
      make the detention unlawful: R (Lumba) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 1 AC 245. So the question is
      whether there was a material breach of section 55. Essentially that
      involves a short question of construction.

  46. Mr Stephen Knafler QC submits that section 55 should be read in a
      similar fashion to section 20 of the Children Act 1989. Children are
      defined in section 55(6) as persons who are under the age of 18. That
      is a pure question of fact. The duty is to ensure that in the case of
      every person who is in fact a child, the functions of the Secretary
      of State and immigration officers under the Immigration Acts are
      discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
      welfare of the individual child. In the present case the welfare of
      the appellant was not taken into account. Therefore there was a
      breach of the section. Mr Knafler reinforces his argument by
      reference to article 5 of the European Convention, the UNCRC and
      other conventions identified in Every Child Matters, and to the
      emphasis placed in domestic law on the importance of the courts
      maintaining responsibility for determining jurisdictional questions
      affecting the power of the executive to detain an individual.

  47. Section 55 of the 2009 Act and section 20 of the Children Act 1989
      contain the same definition of children, but their structure and
      language are very different. Under section 55 the Secretary of State
      has a direct and a vicarious responsibility. She has a direct
      responsibility under section 55(1) for making arrangements for a
      specified purpose. The purpose is to see that immigration functions
      are discharged in a way which has regard to the need to safeguard and
      promote the welfare of children ("the welfare principle"). She has a
      vicarious responsibility, by reason of section 55(3), for any failure
      by an immigration officer (or other person exercising the Secretary
      of State's functions) to have regard to the guidance given by the
      Secretary of State or to the welfare principle.

  48. In order to safeguard and promote the welfare of children the
      Secretary of State has to establish proper systems for arriving at a
      reliable assessment of a person's age. That is not an easy matter, as
      experience shows. The arrangements made by the Secretary of State
      under section 55 include the published policies referred to above:
      Every Child Matters, EIG 59.9.3.1 and Assessing Age.

  49. The instructions in Assessing Age are detailed and careful. In my
      judgment the guidance complies with the Secretary of State's
      obligation under section 55(1), applying its natural and ordinary
      meaning. In this respect, the reasoning set out in the passage quoted
      at para 24 above is persuasive. Further, on the facts of this case
      there is no basis for finding that there was a failure by any
      official to follow that guidance. It follows that there was no breach
      of section 55 and therefore that the exercise of the detention power
      under paragraph 16 was not unlawful.

  50. I have referred to the natural and ordinary meaning of section 55(1).
      Its wording and structure are very different from section 20(1) of
      the Children Act, as I have said, and I am not persuaded that section
      55 should be interpreted in the way for which Mr Knafler contends in
      order to meet the UK's international obligations or to provide
      adequately for the welfare principle. In particular, I do not see
      that the section on its natural construction is inconsistent with
      article 5 of the European Convention or article 3 of the UNCRC. The
      risk of an erroneous assessment can never be entirely eliminated but
      it can be minimised by a careful process and there are appropriate
      safeguards. In addition to the process for making the initial
      assessment, which includes requiring the benefit of any doubt to be
      given to the claimant, the Secretary of State is under a continuing
      obligation to consider any fresh evidence. An age assessment by a
      local authority can be challenged on judicial review, and the
      Secretary of State would be bound to give proper respect to the
      outcome of such proceedings.

  51. The judgment in AAM was right on the facts as Lang J found them, but
      if and insofar as her judgment amounted to holding that any detention
      under paragraph 16 of a child in the mistaken but reasonable belief
      that he was over 18 would ipso facto involve a breach of section 55,
      I would disapprove that part of the judgment.

  52. An asylum claimant who gives his age as under 18 is in practice
      likely also to be a claimant for local authority support under the
      Children Act. For both purposes there will be an age assessment by
      the social services department in any case of doubt. If the claimant
      is assessed as being over 18 and is also detained under paragraph 16,
      any legal challenge is likely to be, as in this case, against both
      the local authority and the Secretary of State. In such a case the
      court would have jurisdiction under Croydon to determine the question
      of age as a primary fact finder under the Children Act. Its
      conclusion – if in the claimant's favour – would obviously affect the
      Secretary of State's future action under the Immigration Acts. It
      would give rise to a new situation and the Secretary of State could
      no longer properly rely on the accuracy of an age assessment which
      had been discredited by a judgment of a court.

  53. A question arose in the course of argument about the legal position
      if the claimant challenged the legality of his detention without
      directly involving the local authority whose social services team had
      carried out the age assessment. Would the court be limited to
      determining whether the Secretary of State had acted lawfully or
      would it also have jurisdiction to make a fresh determination of the
      claimant's age? The latter would not arise from the language of
      section 55 (unlike section 20(1) of the Children Act). The source of
      any such jurisdiction would have to be the court's habeas corpus
      jurisdiction. The point was not argued because both parties proceeded
      on the basis that the court would have such jurisdiction.

  54. The court's habeas corpus jurisdiction is a creation of the common
      law, although it has also been the subject of numerous statutes. The
      courts have power to develop it where necessary in order to achieve
      effective justice in matters of personal liberty. (Professor Paul
      Halliday gives a magisterial account of the history of the
      development of the "great writ" in Habeas Corpus From England to
      Empire, 2010, Harvard University Press.) Although it is unnecessary
      to decide the point, I am sympathetic to the view that the court's
      habeas corpus jurisdiction in this type of situation should not be
      confined to determining whether the Secretary of State had acted
      lawfully in the detention of the claimant, but should extend to
      enable the court to make a fresh determination of the claimant's age,
      which would necessarily impact on the lawfulness of his continued
      detention. The effect of a finding in the claimant's favour would not
      take him outside the scope of paragraph 16, which conferred the
      statutory detention power, but it would impact on the operation
      thereafter of the Secretary of State's policies introduced for the
      purpose of implementing section 55. In practical terms it would mean
      that the court is able to reach a final determination of the
      claimant's age not only when his rights under the Children Act depend
      on it but more fundamentally when his liberty depends on it.

  55. For the reasons set out above, I would dismiss the appeal.

          LORD CARNWATH

  56. On the issues before us in this appeal, I agree entirely with the
      reasoning and conclusions of Lord Toulson, to which I have nothing to
      add.

  57. I do, however, have some reservations with regard to his concluding
      paragraphs, relating to the possible use of habeas corpus to fill a
      perceived gap in the present statutory code. Given the constitutional
      importance of the "Great Writ" of habeas corpus, I would hesitate
      before accepting it as a suitable procedure for the narrow, factual
      inquiries likely to be required in cases such as this. I would in any
      event be particularly anxious that there should first be full
      exploration of all the legal and practical implications.

  58. The evidentiary and procedural challenges arising from the decision
      of the House of Lords in Croydon have now to a large extent been
      addressed by use of the powers under the Tribunals, Courts and
      Enforcement Act 2007, allowing transfer of defined categories of
      judicial review to the Upper Tribunal. Judges of that tribunal, in
      turn, have been able, with the assistance of representatives of
      interested bodies and other experts, to develop the necessary
      specialist skills for handling them. As I understand it, those
      arrangements are working well.

  59. There is at present no provision under the 2007 Act for the
      equivalent transfer of habeas corpus proceedings to the Upper
      Tribunal. Given the constitutional importance of the writ, that seems
      unlikely to change. The problems no doubt could be overcome. There is
      likely also to be more scope for transfer of such judicial expertise
      between the tribunals and the courts under the new powers conferred
      by the Crime and Courts Act 2013, but this seems an additional
      complication which we should be careful of imposing on the parties
      and the lower courts, unless and until the implications have been
      worked out.

  60. Accordingly, I would prefer to say nothing on this issue, which, as
      Lord Toulson acknowledges, is not before us for decision and on which
      we have heard no argument. Nor is there any evidence before us of a
      serious jurisprudential gap requiring an urgent remedy at this level.
      In my view, we would be better advised at this stage to leave it to
      those directly concerned, working with the specialist courts and
      tribunals, to address such problems, if and when they arise, and to
      seek practical solutions to them. If in due course the issue does
      need to return to the higher courts, it will be with a better
      appreciation of what is involved.