          Summary


          Michaelmas Term
          [2013] UKSC 77
          On appeal from: [2012] EWHC 3635 (Admin)

              JUDGMENT


                  R (on the application of Hodkin and another) (Appellants) 
                  v Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages
                  (Respondent)

              before

              Lord Neuberger, President
              Lord Clarke
              Lord Wilson
              Lord Reed
              Lord Toulson

              JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


              11 December 2013

              Heard on 18 July 2013

          Appellant
          Lord Lester of Herne Hill QC
          Naina Patel
          (Instructed by Withers LLP) 	  	Respondent
          James Strachan QC
          (Instructed by Treasury Solicitors)

              LORD TOULSON (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Clarke and Lord
              Reed agree)

       1. Louisa Hodkin (the first appellant) and her fiancé, Alessandro
          Calcioli, would like to be married in the church which they
          regularly attend at 146 Queen Victoria Street, London. The
          minister would be pleased to perform the ceremony, but there is a
          legal obstacle. The church to which they belong is part of the
          Church of Scientology. In R v Registrar General, Ex p Segerdal 
          [1970] 2 QB 697 the Court of Appeal held in a similar case that a
          different church within the Church of Scientology was not a
          "place of meeting for religious worship" within the meaning of
          section 2 of the Places of Worship Registration Act 1855 (18 & 19
          Vict c 81) ("PWRA"), with the result that a valid ceremony of
          marriage could not be conducted there. The central question on
          this appeal is whether the decision in Segerdal should be upheld.

       2. Miss Hodkin was born and brought up in a family of
          Scientologists. Her brother, David, was married at the Church of
          Scientology in Edinburgh. This was a valid marriage under Scots
          law because the Registrar General for Scotland authorises
          ministers of Scientology to perform marriages in Scotland, but
          the law in England is different from that in Scotland.

              The proceedings

       3. The proprietor of the church at 146 Queen Victoria Street is the
          second appellant. On 31 May 2011 a trustee of the church applied
          on behalf of the congregation to the Superintendent Registrar of
          Births, Deaths and Marriages at the Islington and London City
          Register Office to register the church as a "place of meeting for
          religious worship" under PWRA and as a building "for the
          solemnization of marriages therein" under the Marriage Act 1949.
          The application was supported by statutory declarations made by
          Miss Hodkin and by the minister of the church, Mrs Laura Wilks.
          It was also supported by a certificate signed by 24 householders
          stating that it was their usual place of worship (as required by
          section 41 of the Marriage Act, to which I refer below). The
          application was referred to the Registrar General and rejected.
          The refusal letter stated that the Registrar General was bound by
          the decision in Segerdal and therefore unable to proceed with the
          application.

       4. The appellants' claim for judicial review of the Registrar
          General's decision was dismissed by Ouseley J for reasons set out
          in a reserved judgment: [2012] EWHC 3635 (Admin), [2013] PTSR 875
          . It is apparent from his analysis that he was sympathetic to the
          appellants' claim but considered himself bound by Segerdal to
          reject it. He concluded on the evidence that Scientology is a
          religion (a point which in Segerdal had not been explicitly
          decided), but that the stumbling block for the appellants was the
          way in which the Court of Appeal had defined "religious worship"
          as requiring an object of veneration to which the worshiper
          submitted. He said at [84] that it might now be that a different
          approach should be taken to "religious worship", but that he
          remained bound by the Court of Appeal's decision. He did not feel
          that he could "slip free on the basis of better evidence", as he
          put it at [87], although he recognised that a higher court might
          come to a different decision on the evidence, since he did not
          consider that the evidence showed there to have been any
          essential change since Segerdal in the nature and practices of
          Scientology. Nor was he persuaded by arguments that articles 9,
          12 and 14 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human
          Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or the provisions of the Equality
          Act 2010 made any difference.

       5. Ouseley J certified that his judgment involved a point of law of
          general public importance which satisfied the conditions for a
          leapfrog appeal to the Supreme Court, namely "the meaning and
          application of section 2 of the Places of Worship Registration
          Act 1855 to the beliefs and practices of the Scientologists at
          the London Church Chapel and to other religions which may
          practise in similar ways". Leave to appeal was given by this
          court.

              The legislation

       6. During the period from the reformation until the mid-eighteenth
          century, apart from occasional legislative interventions, it was
          left to the Church of England to lay down the rules about how
          marriages could be solemnised and what records were to be kept.
          The rules of the Church permitted extreme informality. A valid
          marriage could be contracted by simple words of consent in a
          church or elsewhere and with or without witnesses. The laxity of
          the law led to uncertainty and abuse until Lord Hardwicke LC
          persuaded Parliament to pass the Clandestine Marriages Act 1753
          (26 Geo 2, c 33). The Act laid down procedures for the
          solemnisation and recording of marriages, over which the Church
          of England was given a virtual monopoly. There were exceptions
          for the marriages of Quakers and Jews, but others such as Roman
          Catholics could only be married in an Anglican church in
          accordance with the Anglican rite. Russell Sandberg aptly
          comments in Law and Religion (2011), p 25, that the law mirrored
          the approach of Parson Thwackum in Henry Fielding's Tom Jones,
          published in 1749:

                  "When I mention religion, I mean the Christian religion;
                  and not only the Christian religion, but the Protestant
                  religion; and not only the Protestant religion, but the
                  Church of England."

       7. Discrimination against other forms of religion was not limited to
          the marriage laws. Under section 19 of the Toleration Act 1688 (1
          Will & Mary, c 18) no congregation for religious worship was
          permitted unless the place of the meeting was certified to the
          bishop of the diocese, the archdeacon or to quarter sessions, and
          was registered in the bishop's or archdeacon's court or recorded
          at quarter sessions.

       8. However, by degrees toleration came to prevail. Under the Places
          of Religious Worship Act 1812 (52 Geo 3, c 155) registration for
          places of worship of Protestants was required only for meetings
          of more than 20 persons, other than the immediate family or
          servants of the person in whose house the meeting was to be held.
          The Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1836 (6 & 7
          Will 4, c 86) was an important step because it established the
          office of Registrar General and set up a scheme for state
          registration of marriages under the Registrar General's
          direction. At the same time the Marriage Act 1836 (6 & 7 Will 4,
          c 85) laid down the formalities for a valid marriage. Section 18
          of that Act for the first time permitted a building which had
          been certified according to law as a place of religious worship
          to be registered as a place for the solemnisation of marriages.

       9. Drawing on the Parliamentary debates, Professor Stephen Cretney
          has described the philosophy underlying the 1836 legislation in 
          Family Law in the Twentieth Century: A History (2003), p 9:

                  "The 1836 Act was based on a very clear analysis of the
                  respective interests of the Church and State in marriage.
                  The State had a proper interest in preventing clandestine
                  marriages and in being able to determine whether or not a
                  person was married, with all the legal consequences which
                  followed from that status; and the state was therefore
                  entitled to insist on a universal and efficient system
                  for the registration of marriages. But so far as the
                  actual celebration of the marriage, the state's concern
                  was limited to ensuring that the ceremony be recognised
                  by both parties as binding."

      10. In 1852 the Places of Religious Worship Act 1812 was modified by
          substituting the Registrar General for the bishop, archdeacon or
          quarter sessions, for purposes of certification and registration.
          In 1855 came the PWRA with which we are concerned and which
          remains largely in force.

      11. Section 2 provides:

                  "Every place of meeting for religious worship of
                  Protestant Dissenters or other Protestants, and of
                  persons professing the Roman Catholic religion, … not
                  heretofore certified and registered or recorded in manner
                  required by law, and every place of meeting for religious
                  worship of persons professing the Jewish religion, not
                  heretofore certified and registered or recorded as
                  aforesaid, and every place of meeting for religious
                  worship of any other body or denomination of persons, may
                  be certified in writing to the Registrar General of
                  Births, Deaths and Marriages in England, through the
                  superintendent registrar of births, deaths, and marriages
                  of the district in which such place may be situate; … and
                  the said superintendent registrar shall, upon the receipt
                  of such certificate in duplicate, forthwith transmit the
                  same to the said Registrar General, who, after having
                  caused the place of meeting therein mentioned to be
                  recorded as hereinafter directed, shall return one of the
                  said certificates to the said superintendent registrar,
                  to be re-delivered by him to the certifying party, and
                  shall keep the other certificate with the records of the
                  General Register Office."

      12. Section 3 requires the Registrar General to keep a book recording
          all places of meeting for religious worship certified to him
          under the Act. Section 5 requires that on the delivery of every
          certificate to the superintendent registrar for transmission to
          the Registrar General, for the purpose of being recorded under
          the Act, the person delivering it is to pay a fee. The fee was
          originally set at 2s 6d. Since April 1998 it has been £28.00
          (under the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Fees)
          Order 1997 (SI 1997/2939) Sch 1, para 1). Section 7 provides for
          a list of places registered under the Act to be published.
          Section 6 provides for the Registrar General to be notified if a
          certified place of worship has ceased to be used as such. Section
          8 provides for the cancellation of any record of certification of
          premises which have ceased to be used as a place of meeting for
          religious worship, and for the removal of the premises from the
          list kept under section 7.

      13. The current provisions for giving legal effect to marriages in
          places of worship registered under PWRA are contained in the
          Marriage Act 1949, as amended.

      14. Section 26(1), as amended by section 161(3) of the Immigration
          and Asylum Act 1999, provides:

                  "Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act the
                  following marriages may be solemnised on the authority of
                  two certificates of a superintendent registrar –

                  (a) a marriage in a registered building according to such
                  form and ceremony as the persons to be married see fit to
                  adopt …"

              Section 41 (enacting in substance section 18 of the Marriage
              Act 1836) makes provision for a building which has been
              legally certified as a place of religious worship to be
              registered for the solemnisation of marriages upon an
              application made by the proprietor or trustee of the building
              and supported by a certificate signed by at least 20
              householders verifying that the building is used by them as
              their usual place of public religious worship.

              Section 44(1), as amended by section 169 of, and para 23 of
              Schedule 14 to, the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,
              provides:

                  "Subject to the provisions of this section, where the
                  notices of marriage and certificates issued by a
                  superintendent registrar state that a marriage between
                  the persons named therein is intended to be solemnised in
                  a registered building, the marriage may be solemnised in
                  that building according to such form and ceremony as
                  those persons may see fit to adopt;

                  Provided that no marriage shall be solemnised in any
                  registered building without the consent of the minister
                  or one of the trustees, owners, deacons or managers
                  thereof, or in the case of a registered building of the
                  Roman Catholic Church, without the consent of the
                  officiating minister thereof."

              Evidence

      15. Mrs Wilks has been a minister of the Church of Scientology since
          1995 and the minister of the church at 146 Queen Victoria Street
          since 2006. She has conducted many congregational services in its
          chapel. In her statutory declaration she gives an account of the
          history, beliefs and practices of Scientology. Her evidence was
          not challenged and so may be taken as accurate for present
          purposes. In the judicial review proceedings the appellants also
          filed other evidence about the history, nature and practices of
          Scientology, but it is sufficient to refer to the evidence of Mrs
          Wilks, as the minister of the chapel which the appellants wish to
          have registered as a place of religious worship.

      16. The first Church of Scientology was founded in 1954 in the United
          States by L Ron Hubbard, and the doctrine of the church is based
          on his writings and recordings. There are now thousands of
          Scientology churches in over 160 countries. Scientology involves
          belief in and worship of a supernatural power, also known as God,
          the Supreme Being or the Creator. Understanding of the Creator is
          attainable only through spiritual enlightenment, and the goal of
          Scientology is to help its members to obtain such enlightenment.
          Scientology holds that the accomplishment of spiritual salvation
          is possible only through successive stages of enlightenment. In
          this respect it bears some similarity to Buddhism. Ascent through
          these spiritual states brings the believer closer to God.

      17. L Ron Hubbard identified eight human impulses which he termed
          dynamics of existence. In ascending order they are the urge of
          survival as an individual, the urge of survival through one's
          family, the urge of group survival, the urge of survival for all
          humankind, the urge of survival for all life forms, the urge of
          survival of the physical universe, the urge of survival for all
          spiritual beings and lastly the urge of existence as infinity.
          God is infinity but Scientologists do not describe God in
          anthropomorphic terms. All Scientology practices are aimed
          ultimately at complete affinity with the eighth dynamic or
          infinity.

      18. Congregational services are described by Mrs Wilks as follows:

                  "Congregational services are an important feature in
                  Scientology Churches. These are what occurs in our
                  chapel. Such services are occasions where we commune with
                  the Infinite and reach with reverence and respect towards
                  the Supreme Being. They always include a prayer to the
                  Supreme Being in which the whole congregation joins.
                  There is also a reading of the Creed of the Church of
                  Scientology, in which the pre-eminent position of God is
                  affirmed. All congregational services are open to the
                  public. Scientologists also perform naming ceremonies,
                  funerals and weddings and these occasions are open to
                  Scientologists, their families and the public."

      19. The creed states in part:

                  "We of the Church believe:

                  That all men of whatever race, colour or Creed were
                  created with equal rights;

                  That all men have inalienable rights to their own
                  religious practices and their performance;

                  …

                  That all men have inalienable rights to think freely, to
                  talk freely, to write freely their own opinions and to
                  counter or utter or write upon the opinions of others;

                  That all men have inalienable rights to the creation of
                  their own kind;

                  That the souls of men have the rights of men;

                  …

                  And that no agency less than God has the power to suspend
                  or set aside these rights, overtly or covertly.

                  …

                  And we of the Church believe:

                  That the spirit can be saved and

                  That the spirit alone may save or heal the body."

      20. The prayer for total freedom begins:

                  "May the author of the universe enable all men to reach
                  an understanding of their spiritual nature.

                  May awareness and understanding of life expand, so that
                  all may come to know the author of the universe.

                  And may others also reach this understanding which brings
                  Total Freedom."

      21. The prayer goes on to elaborate on various freedoms and
          concludes:

                  "Freedom to use and understand man's potential – a
                  potential that is God-given and God-like.

                  And freedom to achieve that understanding and awareness
                  that is Total Freedom.

                  May God let it be so."

      22. Other standard features of congregational services are a sermon
          based on the works of L Ron Hubbard and a practice known as group
          auditing. This is led by the minister. Its aim is to help
          Scientologists to free themselves from material influences of the
          physical universe and so attain greater spiritual awareness.

              Segerdal

      23. In Segerdal the Church of Scientology challenged the refusal of
          the Registrar General to register its chapel at East Grinstead as
          a place of meeting for religious worship. The challenge was
          rejected by the Divisional Court (Lord Parker CJ, Ashworth and
          Cantley JJ), [1970] 1 QB 430, and their decision was upheld by
          the Court of Appeal (Lord Denning MR, Winn and Buckley LJJ)
          [1970] 2 QB 697.

      24. The first argument for the Church was that the Registrar
          General's function in registering places certified to him was
          purely ministerial, and that he was not entitled to withhold
          registration on the ground that the premises were not in truth a
          place of meeting for religious worship. The argument was rejected
          on three grounds. First, as a matter of grammar, section 2 of
          PWRA did not provide that every place which was certified as a
          place of meeting for religious worship should be registered; but
          instead that every place of meeting for religious worship which
          was certified should be registered. This meant that the
          jurisdiction to register was dependent on the certificate being
          correct.

      25. Secondly, this construction was consistent with the requirement
          under section 8 of PWRA for the Registrar General to cancel a
          record of certification if it should appear to his satisfaction
          that any certified place of meeting for religious worship had
          wholly ceased to be used as such. It would not make sense that
          the Registrar General should be obliged to register the premises
          in the first place if they were not truly being used as a place
          of meeting for public worship.

      26. Thirdly, registration of a building as a place of meeting for
          public worship opened the door to other advantages, and
          Parliament could not be supposed to have intended that they were
          to be obtained merely upon the certificate of the persons
          interested in obtaining them, without any power on the part of
          the Registrar General to consider the accuracy of the
          certificate. I agree with Lord Wilson that the decision reached
          in Segerdal about the nature of the Registrar General's function
          was right for the reasons which he gives.

      27. Dealing with the question whether the chapel was a place of
          meeting for religious worship within the meaning of the Act, Lord
          Denning said [1970] 2 QB 697, 707:

                  "We have had much discussion on the meaning of the word
                  "religion" and of the word "worship", taken separately,
                  but I think we should take the combined phrase, "place of
                  meeting for religious worship" as used in the statute of
                  1855. It connotes to my mind a place of which the
                  principal use is as a place where people come together as
                  a congregation or assembly to do reverence to God. It
                  need not be the God which the Christians worship. It may
                  be another God, or an unknown God, but it must be
                  reverence to a deity. There may be exceptions. For
                  instance, Buddhist temples are properly described as
                  places of meeting for religious worship. But, apart from
                  exceptional cases of that kind, it seems to me the
                  governing idea behind the words "place of meeting for
                  religious worship" is that it should be a place for the
                  worship of God. I am sure that would be the meaning
                  attached by those who framed this legislation of 1855."

      28. Applying that test to the evidence before the court about the
          nature of Scientology, Lord Denning commented:

                  "Turning to the creed of the Church of Scientology, I
                  must say that it seems to me to be more a philosophy of
                  the existence of man or of life, rather than a religion. 
                  Religious worship means reverence or veneration of God or
                  of a Supreme Being. I do not find any such reverence or
                  veneration in the creed of this church. … When I look
                  through the ceremonies and the affidavits, I am left with
                  the feeling that there is nothing in it of reverence for
                  God or a deity, but simply instruction in a philosophy.
                  There may be belief in a spirit of man, but there is no
                  belief in a spirit of God."

      29. Winn and Buckley LJJ gave concurring judgments. Winn LJ said that
          he did not feel well qualified to discuss whether Scientology
          could properly be called a religion, but the evidence did not
          show to his mind that its adherents observed any form of worship.
          He explained what he meant by worship at pp 708-709:

                  "… by no "worship", if I am bound to define my terms, I
                  mean to indicate that they do not humble themselves in
                  reverence and recognition of the dominant power and
                  control of any entity or being outside their own body and
                  life."

      30. Similarly, Buckley LJ said, at p 709:

                  "Worship I take to be something which must have some at
                  least of the following characteristics: submission to the
                  object worshipped, veneration of that object, praise,
                  thanksgiving, prayer or intercession."

              Discussion

      31. As Lord Denning observed, "religious worship" in section 2 is a
          composite expression. Nevertheless, Ouseley J was in my view
          right to begin by considering whether Scientology is properly to
          be regarded as a religion. As he said, the question whether the
          services performed in the chapel are properly to be regarded as a
          form of religious worship is inevitably conditioned by whether
          Scientology is to be regarded as a religion. Indeed, Lord
          Denning's definition of religious worship carried within it an
          implicit theistic definition of religion. It was because the
          Church of Scientology's services did not contain reverence for
          God, as Lord Denning understood the meaning of God, that he
          concluded that the services did not amount to religious worship.

      32. Religion and English law meet today at various points. Charity
          law protects trusts as charitable if they are for the advancement
          of religion. Individuals have a right to freedom of thought,
          conscience and religion under article 9 of the European
          Convention. They enjoy the right not to be discriminated against
          on grounds of religion or belief under EU Council Directive
          2000/78/EC and under domestic equality legislation.

      33. In Re South Place Ethical Society [1980] 1 WLR 1565, 1572, a case
          about charity law, Dillon J held that religion requires "faith in
          a god and worship of that god", quoting Buckley LJ's definition
          of religious worship in Segerdal. More recently Parliament
          provided partial definitions of religion in section 2 the
          Charities Act 2006 (now section 3 of the Charities Act 2011) and
          section 10 of the Equality Act 2010 for the purposes of those
          Acts.

      34. There has never been a universal legal definition of religion in
          English law, and experience across the common law world over many
          years has shown the pitfalls of attempting to attach a narrowly
          circumscribed meaning to the word. There are several reasons for
          this – the different contexts in which the issue may arise, the
          variety of world religions, developments of new religions and
          religious practices, and developments in the common understanding
          of the concept of religion due to cultural changes in society.
          While the historical origins of the legislation are relevant to
          understanding its purpose, the expression "place of meeting for
          religious worship" in section 2 of PWRA has to be interpreted in
          accordance with contemporary understanding of religion and not by
          reference to the culture of 1855. It is no good considering
          whether the members of the legislature over 150 years ago would
          have considered Scientology to be a religion because it did not
          exist.

      35. From the considerable volume of common law jurisprudence, I would
          select two cases for particular attention – the judgment of Adams
          CJ in Malnak v Yogi 592 F.2d 197
          <http://www.worldlii.org/us/tmp/cases/federal/USCA3/1979/125.html> 
          (1979) concurring in a per curiam opinion of the US Court of
          Appeals, 3rd Circuit, and the judgment of the High Court of
          Australia in Church of the New Faith v Comr of Pay-Roll Tax 
          (Victoria) (1983) 154 CLR 136.

      36. In Malnak v Yogi the issue was whether the teaching in a public
          school of a course entitled the "Science of Creative Intelligence
          – Transcendental Meditation" was a religious activity violating
          the first amendment of the US Constitution. According to Judge
          Adams, religion bore the same meaning in that context as in the
          free exercise of religion clause of the Constitution. He
          contrasted older authorities (such as the decision of the Supreme
          Court in Davis v Beason 133 US 333
          <http://www.worldlii.org/us/tmp/cases/federal/USSC/1890/39.html> 
          (1890)), which adopted a strictly theistic definition of
          religion, with more recent jurisprudence (including the decisions
          of the Supreme Court in United States v Seeger 380 US 163
          <http://www.worldlii.org/us/tmp/cases/federal/USSC/1965/49.html> 
          (1965) and Welsh v United States 398 US 333
          <http://www.worldlii.org/us/tmp/cases/federal/USSC/1970/147.html> 
          (1970)), which had moved towards a broader approach in
          recognition of the fact that adherence to the traditional
          definition would deny religious identification to the faiths
          adhered to by millions of Americans.

      37. Judge Adams noted that although the old definition had been
          repudiated, no new definition had yet been fully formed. Instead,
          the courts had proceeded by a process of analogy, looking at
          familiar religions as models in order to ascertain, by
          comparison, whether the new set of beliefs served the same
          purposes as unquestioned and accepted religions. He observed,
          however, at p 208, that it is one thing to conclude "by analogy"
          that a particular group of ideas is religious; it is quite
          another to explain what indicia are to be looked at in making
          such an analogy and justifying it. He identified three such
          indicia.

      38. The first was that the belief system is concerned with the
          ultimate questions of human existence: the meaning of life and
          death, mankind's role in the universe, the proper moral code of
          right and wrong. The second was that the belief system is
          comprehensive in the sense that it provides an all-embracing set
          of beliefs in answer to the ultimate questions. The third was
          that there were external signs that the belief system was of a
          group nature which could be analogised to accepted religions.
          Such signs might include formal services, ceremonial functions,
          the existence of clergy, structure and organisation, and attempts
          at propagation. These indicia were not to be thought of as a
          final test for a religion. Rather, they were features which
          recognised religions would typically exhibit.

      39. The significant contribution of the judgment to the development
          of the jurisprudence in this area lay in Judge Adams's attempt to
          adopt a comparative approach to the identification of a religion,
          rather than a traditional definition based on the Judeo-Christian
          religions. However, the approach had its shortcomings. Professor
          Sarah Barringer Gordon identified them in The Spirit of the Law:
          Religious Voices and the Constitution in Modern America (2010),
          at p 150, where she observed that "it invested extraordinary
          power in the judiciary to decide where religion begins and
          secular life ends" and created such uncertainty as to make the
          category of religion unstable. Professor Gordon has provided a
          fuller critique in a chapter entitled The New Age and the New
          Law: Malnak v Yogi and the Definition of Religion in
          Constitutional Law in a multi-authored book Religion and Law
          Stories (2010), edited by Professor Leslie Griffin. In it she has
          described the decision as influential but controversial and now
          somewhat dated. Judge Adams's suggested indicia were also
          subjected to critical analysis in the Church of the New Faith 
          case cited above.

      40. The appellant in that case was the Church of Scientology going by
          its name in Victoria. The case arose under the Victoria Pay-roll
          Tax Act 1971. There was an exemption from tax payable under the
          Act for wages paid by a religious institution. The question
          considered by the High Court, as formulated in the judgment of
          Mason ACJ and Brennan J at p 130, was "whether the beliefs,
          practices and observances which were established by the
          affidavits and oral evidence as the set of beliefs, practices and
          observances accepted by Scientologists, are properly to be
          described as a religion." The court held that they were. There
          were three judgments, each of which set out a somewhat different
          route to the same conclusion.

      41. Mason ACJ and Brennan J rightly observed, at p 132, that freedom
          of religion being equally conferred on all, the variety of
          religious beliefs which were within the area of legal immunity
          was not restricted. There could be no acceptable discrimination
          between institutions which took their character from religions
          which the majority of the community recognised as religions and
          institutions that took their character from religions which
          lacked that general recognition.

      42. On the other hand, they observed that "the mantle of immunity
          would soon be in tatters if it were wrapped around beliefs,
          practices and observances of every kind whenever a group of
          adherents chose to call them a religion", and that a more
          objective criterion was required. That criterion had to be found
          in the indicia exhibited by acknowledged religions. (In this
          respect the influence of Judge Adams can be seen at work.) They
          then posed the question what was the range of acknowledged
          religions from which the criterion was to be derived. They
          observed at pp 132-133:

                  "The literature of comparative religion, modern means of
                  communication and the diverse ethnic and cultural
                  components of contemporary Australian society require
                  that the search for religious indicia should not be
                  confined to the Judaic group of religions – Judaism,
                  Christianity, Islam – for the tenets of other
                  acknowledged religions, including those which are not
                  monotheistic or even theistic, are elements in the
                  contemporary atmosphere of ideas. But the task of
                  surveying the whole range of Judaic and other
                  acknowledged religions is daunting… "

              They cited with approval Latham CJ's observation in Adelaide
              Company of Jehovah's Witnesses Inc v The Commonwealth (1943)
              67 CLR 116, 123:

                  "It would be difficult, if not impossible, to devise a
                  definition of religion which would satisfy the adherents
                  of all the many and various religions which exist, or
                  have existed, in the world."

      43. Their critical conclusion was at p 136:

                  "We would therefore hold that, for the purposes of the
                  law, the criteria of religion are twofold: first, belief
                  in a supernatural Being, Thing or Principle; and second,
                  the acceptance of canons of conduct in order to give
                  effect to that belief, though canons of conduct which
                  offend against the ordinary laws are outside the area of
                  any immunity, privilege or right conferred on the grounds
                  of religion."

      44. They considered, at pp 139-140, the test propounded by Judge
          Adams and rejected the appellants' submission that the court
          should apply his indicia. They were critical of the first of his
          indicia, ie that the beliefs addressed issues of ultimate
          concern, because they said that to attribute a religious
          character to one's views by reference to the questions which the
          views addressed, rather than by reference to the answers
          propounded, was to expand the concept of religion beyond its true
          domain. Such an approach was capable of sweeping into the
          category of religious beliefs philosophies that rejected the
          label of a religion and which denied or were silent as to the
          existence of any supernatural Being, Thing or Principle. The
          second of the criteria, ie comprehensiveness, was defective
          because although a set of religious ideas will frequently be
          comprehensive, a religion need not necessarily set out to answer
          all fundamental questions. The third of the suggested indicia, ie
          the existence of rituals or the like, was defective because
          rituals might or might not be religious in nature.

      45. They rejected Dillon J's test in In re South Place Ethical
          Society [1980] 1 WLR 1565, based on Segerdal, because it limited
          religion to theistic religions. This was too narrow a test
          because it would exclude Buddhism (or at least a part of
          Buddhism) and possibly other acknowledged religions. As to 
          Segerdal itself, they observed that "the statutory reference to
          worship suggested that Parliament had in mind a theistic
          religion": p 140.

      46. They concluded on the evidence that belief in a Supreme Being was
          part of Scientology, although there was no tenet of Scientology
          which expressed a particular concept of a Supreme Being; and that
          Scientology's adherents accepted and followed its practices and
          observances because they perceived themselves to be giving effect
          to their supernatural beliefs. Accordingly, Scientology met the
          two criteria which they had identified.

      47. Murphy J, at pp 150-151, reiterated that religious discrimination
          by officials or by courts was unacceptable in a free society. His
          preferred approach was to state what was sufficient, even if not
          necessary, to bring a body which claimed to be religious within
          the category of religion. Some claims to be religious were merely
          a hoax, but to reach that conclusion required an extreme case. He
          considered that any body which claimed to be religious and
          believed in a supernatural Being or Beings, whether physical and
          visible or an invisible god or spirit, or an abstract god or
          entity, was religious; and any body that claimed to be religious,
          and offered a way to find meaning and purpose in life, was
          religious.

      48. Wilson and Deane JJ began in a similar way to Mason ACJ and
          Brennan J, and Judge Adams in Malnak v Yogi, saying at p 173 that
          there was no single characteristic which could be laid down as
          constituting a formularised legal criterion for determining
          whether a particular system of ideas and practices constituted a
          religion. The most that could be done was to formulate the more
          important of the indicia or guidelines by reference to which that
          question fell to be answered. Those indicia should be derived by
          empirical observation of accepted religions. They were liable to
          vary with changing social conditions and the relative importance
          of any particular one would vary from case to case. They observed
          that, of necessity, the field into which they were venturing was
          more the domain of the student of comparative religion than that
          of the lawyer. They identified the important indicia, at p 174,
          as follows:

                  "One of the more important indicia of 'a religion' is
                  that the particular collection of ideas and /or practices
                  involves belief in the supernatural, that is to say,
                  belief that reality extends beyond that which is capable
                  of perception by the senses. If that be absent, it is
                  unlikely that one has 'a religion'. Another is that the
                  ideas relate to man's nature and place in the universe
                  and his relation to things supernatural. A third is that
                  the ideas are accepted by adherents as requiring or
                  encouraging them to observe particular standards or codes
                  of conduct or to participate in specific practices having
                  supernatural significance. A fourth is that, however
                  loosely knit and varying in beliefs and practices
                  adherents may be, they constitute an identifiable group
                  or identifiable groups. A fifth, and perhaps more
                  controversial, indicium (cf Malnak v Yogi) is that the
                  adherents themselves see the collection of ideas and/or
                  practices as constituting a religion."

      49. They added that none of these indicia was necessarily
          determinative of the question whether a particular collection of
          ideas and and/or practices should be characterised as a religion.
          They were no more than aids in determining that question and the
          assistance to be derived from them would vary according to the
          context in which the question arose. However, all of those
          indicia were satisfied by most, if not all, leading religions.
          They considered that the view which they had expressed about the
          meaning of "religion" accorded broadly with the newer, more
          expansive, reading of that term that had developed in the United
          States in recent decades as particularly described in the
          judgment of Judge Adams. They considered that Scientology
          satisfied all five indicia which they had identified.

      50. In the present case Ouseley J's conclusion that Scientology is a
          religion was not challenged by a respondent's notice and counsel
          for the Registrar General preferred to confine his submissions to
          arguing that, whether or not Scientology is a religion, the
          Registrar General was properly entitled to conclude that its
          ceremonies and practices do not amount to religious worship for
          the reasons given by the Court of Appeal in Segerdal. I consider
          that Ouseley J's conclusion was right for a number of reasons.

      51. Unless there is some compelling contextual reason for holding
          otherwise, religion should not be confined to religions which
          recognise a supreme deity. First and foremost, to do so would be
          a form of religious discrimination unacceptable in today's
          society. It would exclude Buddhism, along with other faiths such
          as Jainism, Taoism, Theosophy and part of Hinduism. The evidence
          in the present case shows that, among others, Jains, Theosophists
          and Buddhists have registered places of worship in England. Lord
          Denning in Segerdal [1970] 2 QB 697, 707 acknowledged that
          Buddhist temples were "properly described as places of meeting
          for religious worship" but he referred to them as "exceptional
          cases" without offering any further explanation. The need to make
          an exception for Buddhism (which has also been applied to Jainism
          and Theosophy), and the absence of a satisfactory explanation for
          it, are powerful indications that there is something unsound in
          the supposed general rule.

      52. Further, to confine religion to a religion which involves belief
          in a "supreme deity" leads into difficult theological territory.
          On the evidence of Mrs Wilks, Scientologists do believe in a
          supreme deity of a kind, but of an abstract and impersonal
          nature. Ideas about the nature of God are the stuff of
          theological debate.

      53. Possibly the most controversial English theological publication
          in the last 100 years was entitled Honest to God. It was written
          in 1963, a few years before the decision in Segerdal. The author
          was John Robinson, a distinguished New Testament scholar and then
          Bishop of Woolwich. Its central theme was that traditional
          Christian forms of description of God were often unintelligible
          to modern secular society and that God was properly to be
          understood as "the ground of our being". Unusually for a
          theological book, it was a best seller. The reason for this was
          that it caused a storm of protest among traditional Christians
          that such views should be expressed by an Anglican bishop. The
          point which I seek to illustrate is that it is not appropriate
          that the Registrar General or courts should become drawn into
          such territory for the purpose of deciding whether premises
          qualify as a place of meeting for religious worship.

      54. For the purposes of charity law, section 3(2)(a) of the Charities
          Act 2011 now states that:

                  "'religion' includes –

                      (i) a religion which involves belief in more than one
                      god, and

                      (ii) a religion which does not involve belief in a
                      god."

      55. That definition removes uncertainty created by Dillon J's
          judgment in South Place Ethical Society about whether religious
          charitable trusts exclude faiths such as Hinduism and Buddhism.
          It has no direct application to section 2 of PWRA, but it is a
          further indication that the understanding of religion in today's
          society is broad.

      56. It might be argued that the expression "religious worship" in
          section 2 of the 1855 Act shows that Parliament intended the word
          "religious" to be given a narrow interpretation. I would reject
          that argument. The language of the section showed an
          intentionally broad sweep. It included "Protestant Dissenters or
          other Protestants", "persons professing the Roman Catholic
          religion", "persons professing the Jewish religion" and "any
          other body or denomination of persons". It may be that the
          members of the legislature in 1855 would not have had in mind
          adherence to other faiths such as Buddhism, but that is no ground
          for holding that they were intended to be excluded from
          legislation passed to remove religious discrimination.

      57. Of the various attempts made to describe the characteristics of
          religion, I find most helpful that of Wilson and Deane JJ. For
          the purposes of PWRA, I would describe religion in summary as a
          spiritual or non-secular belief system, held by a group of
          adherents, which claims to explain mankind's place in the
          universe and relationship with the infinite, and to teach its
          adherents how they are to live their lives in conformity with the
          spiritual understanding associated with the belief system. By
          spiritual or non-secular I mean a belief system which goes beyond
          that which can be perceived by the senses or ascertained by the
          application of science. I prefer not to use the word
          "supernatural" to express this element, because it is a loaded
          word which can carry a variety of connotations. Such a belief
          system may or may not involve belief in a supreme being, but it
          does involve a belief that there is more to be understood about
          mankind's nature and relationship to the universe than can be
          gained from the senses or from science. I emphasise that this is
          intended to be a description and not a definitive formula.

      58. There is a particular reason, if it were needed, for excluding
          essentially secular belief systems from religion for the purposes
          of PWRA. I have previously referred to section 26(1)(a) of the
          Marriage Act 1949, as amended, which permits marriage in a
          registered building according to such form and ceremony as the
          persons to be married see fit to adopt. Additionally, section
          26(1)(bb), as inserted by section 1(1) of the Marriage Act 1994,
          permits marriages to be solemnised on the authority of a
          superintendent registrar on "approved premises". Under that
          provision marriages can now take place in hotels or elsewhere.
          The form of marriage on approved premises is governed by section
          46B, as inserted by section 1(2) of the 1994 Act, and sub-section
          (4) provides:

                  "No religious services shall be used at a marriage on
                  approved premises in pursuance of section 26(1)(bb) of
                  this Act."

      59. The legislation therefore makes separate provision for religious
          wedding ceremonies on registered premises and secular wedding
          services on approved premises.

      60. On the approach which I have taken to the meaning of religion,
          the evidence is amply sufficient to show that Scientology is
          within it; but there remains the question whether the chapel at
          146 Victoria Street is "a place of meeting for religious
          worship".

      61. In my view the meaning given to worship in Segerdal was unduly
          narrow, but even if it was not unduly narrow in 1970, it is
          unduly narrow now.

      62. I interpret the expression "religious worship" as wide enough to
          include religious services, whether or not the form of service
          falls within the narrower definition adopted in Segerdal. This
          broader interpretation accords with standard dictionary
          definitions. The Chambers Dictionary, 12th ed (2011) defines the
          noun "worship" as including both "adoration paid to a deity, etc"
          and "religious service", and it defines "worship" as an
          intransitive verb as "to perform acts of adoration; to take part
          in religious service". Similarly, the Concise Oxford English
          Dictionary, 12th ed (2011), defines "worship" as including both
          "the feeling or expression of reverence and adoration of a deity"
          and "religious rites and ceremonies".

      63. The broader interpretation accords with the purpose of the
          statute in permitting members of a religious congregation, who
          have a meeting place where they perform their religious rites, to
          carry out religious ceremonies of marriage there. Their
          authorisation to do so should not depend on fine theological or
          liturgical niceties as to how precisely they see and express
          their relationship with the infinite (referred to by
          Scientologists as "God" in their creed and universal prayer).
          Those matters, which have been gone into in close detail in the
          evidence in this case, are more fitting for theologians than for
          the Registrar General or the courts.

      64. There is a further significant point. If, as I have held,
          Scientology comes within the meaning of a religion, but its
          chapel cannot be registered under PWRA because its services do
          not involve the kind of veneration which the Court of Appeal in 
          Segerdal considered essential, the result would be to prevent
          Scientologists from being married anywhere in a form which
          involved use of their marriage service. They could have a service
          in their chapel, but it would not be a legal marriage, and they
          could have a civil marriage on other "approved premises" under
          section 26(1)(bb) of the Marriage Act, but they could not
          incorporate any form of religious service because of the
          prohibition in section 46B(4). They would therefore be under a
          double disability, not shared by atheists, agnostics or most
          religious groups. This would be illogical, discriminatory and
          unjust. When Parliament prohibited the use of any "religious
          service" on approved premises in section 46B(4), it can only have
          been on the assumption that any religious service of marriage
          could lawfully be held at a meeting place for religious services
          by registration under PWRA.

              Conclusion

      65. I would overrule the decision in Segerdal; allow the appeal;
          declare that the chapel at 146 Queen Victoria Street is a place
          of meeting for religious worship within section 2 of PWRA; and
          order the Registrar General to register the chapel under section
          3 of PWRA and as a place for the solemnisation of marriages under
          section 41(1) of the Marriage Act. It is unnecessary in these
          circumstances to consider the arguments advanced by the
          appellants under the Equality Act and the European Convention.

              LORD WILSON (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Clarke and Lord
              Reed agree)

      66. I agree with the judgment of Lord Toulson and add a judgment of
          my own on a discrete point. Lord Toulson has explained at para 24
          that in R v Registrar General, Ex P Segerdal [1970] 2 QB 697
          ("the Segerdal case") the first submission made on behalf of the
          Church of Scientology (and Mr Segerdal) was that the function of
          the Registrar General in recording a place certified to him under
          the Places of Worship Registration Act 1855 ("PWRA") was purely
          ministerial, in other words that he had no right to decline to
          record a place on the ground that in his opinion it was not a
          place of meeting for religious worship. Lord Toulson has set out
          at paras 24-26 the three reasons advanced in that case for the
          court's rejection of the submission.

      67. In the present proceedings the Church of Scientology (and Ms
          Hodkin) did not initially ask this court to overrule the part of
          the decision in the Segerdal case which had ruled that the
          function of the Registrar General in recording a place certified
          under PWRA was not purely ministerial in the sense which I have
          described. At the hearing, however, Lord Reed observed that the
          Court of Appeal's ruling might be questionable. His observation
          led Lord Lester, on behalf of that Church, to ask to be permitted
          to submit that, subject to an inherent discretion not to record a
          place in circumstances in which the certificate of it represented
          an abuse of the procedure, the Registrar General's function was
          purely ministerial and that the ruling to the contrary in the 
          Segerdal case should be overruled. At the end of the hearing the
          court directed that submissions be made in writing on the power
          of the Registrar General to decline to record a place certified
          to her. Her submission is that in that regard the ruling in the 
          Segerdal case was correct. The considered position of the Church
          is however that, although she may lawfully record a place only if
          it is in fact one of religious worship, she should presume that a
          place certified to her is one of religious worship unless she
          receives information to the contrary.

      68. I have come to the conclusion that in the Segerdal case the Court
          of Appeal was correct to rule that the function of the Registrar
          General is to record a place certified to her only if it is a
          place of religious worship. It follows that she has the right to
          investigate whether a place is one of religious worship and that,
          if she concludes that a place is not one of religious worship,
          then, subject to judicial review of her conclusion, she has a
          duty not to record it. Whether she chooses, in depth or at all,
          to investigate the assertion that a place certified to her is one
          of religious worship is a matter for her discretion and I see no
          basis for trammelling it with the presumption upon the basis of
          which, according to the Church, she ought to proceed.

      69. I acknowledge, however, that the issue, which one might describe
          in shorthand as that of self-certification, is not free from
          difficulty. Since it relates to the jurisdiction of the Registrar
          General under PWRA and thus to the parameters of the court's role
          in reviewing her exercise of it, Lord Reed was, I respectfully
          suggest, right to raise it for the court's consideration.

      70. The certification of places of religious worship has a long
          history. Its background lies in the penal laws against
          nonconformists which were enacted following the restoration of
          Charles II in 1660. Among those laws, compendiously called the
          Clarendon Code, was the Conventicles Act 1670 (22 Car II c 1)
          which, by section 1, made it an offence for five or more persons
          to be present at "any assembly, conventicle or meeting, under
          colour or pretence of any exercise of religion, in other manner
          than according to the liturgy and practice of the Church of
          England". The Toleration Act 1688 granted specified dissenters
          (excluding Roman Catholics) who took prescribed oaths and made
          prescribed declarations exemption from liability under specified
          penal laws including, by section 4, under the 1670 Act.
          Importantly for present purposes, however, section 19 of the 1688
          Act provided that the exemption from liability under the 1670 Act
          did not arise until the place of meeting for religious worship
          had been certified either to the bishop and registered in his
          court or to the justices of the peace and recorded in their
          court.

      71. Now it is clear that the function of the bishop and of the
          justices under section 19 of the 1688 Act was indeed only
          ministerial: they had no power to decline to register or record a
          place which had been certified to them. This was decided by Lord
          Mansfield in the Court of King's Bench in R v Derbyshire Justices 
          (1766) 1 Black W 605
          <http://www.worldlii.org/int/cases/EngR/1746/584.pdf> , 4 Burr
          1991. There the justices had declined to record a place certified
          to them on the basis that they were not satisfied either that
          those certifying (who were Methodists) fell within the species of
          dissenters tolerated by the 1688 Act or that they had taken the
          prescribed oaths and made the prescribed declarations. By
          mandamus, the court ordered the justices to record the place.
          Blackstone, who had represented the justices, reported:

                  "But the court was of opinion, that in registering and
                  recording the certificate, the justices were merely
                  ministerial; and that after a meeting house has been duly
                  registered, still, if the persons resorting to it do not
                  bring themselves within the Act of Toleration, such
                  registering will not protect them from the penalties of
                  the law." (p 606)

              I am very doubtful whether, when in the Segerdal case he
              sought, at p 705, to explain the decision in the Derbyshire
              Justices case, Lord Denning MR was correct to state that the
              role of the justices had been ministerial only because the
              place was truly one of religious worship. In my view it was
              ministerial in every sense because the certification and its
              registration or recording represented no more than one of the
              steps which those certifying had to take in order to have a
              defence to any summons under the 1670 Act. Certification was
              an exercise in self-protection, somewhat analogous to the
              purchase today of a television licence, which does not depend
              on proof of ownership of a television and is issued
              automatically.

      72. The question is whether the construction placed in the 
          Derbyshire Justices case on section 19 of the 1688 Act also
          applies to sections 2 and 3 of PWRA. First, however, it is
          relevant to note the effect of two intervening Acts.

      73. The Places of Religious Worship Act 1812 repealed some of the
          Clarendon Code, including the 1670 Act, and reformulated the
          offence of meeting for religious purposes. It, again, related
          only to Protestant dissenters but it was extended to Roman
          Catholics by the Roman Catholic Charities Act 1832 (2 & 3 Will 4,
          c 115) and to Jews by the Religious Disabilities Act 1846 (9 & 10
          Vict, c 59). Although it did not repeal the 1688 Act, the 1812
          Act, by section 2, defined the offence so as not to apply to
          meetings in places which either had been "certified and
          registered [or recorded]" under the 1688 Act or were to be
          "certified" under the 1812 Act itself. Although the provision for
          registration or recording was repeated, it seems therefore that
          the defence to a summons, whether by an occupier of the place
          under section 2 of the 1812 Act or by a preacher or worshipper
          there under section 4, was to depend on the certificate rather
          than also on the registration or record thereof. This (one might
          contend) downgraded the significance of the registration or
          record and thus lessened the likelihood that the bishop or the
          justices were then entitled to scrutinise the truth of a
          certificate.

      74. The above contention derives some support from the Protestant
          Dissenters Act 1852 (15 & 16 Vict, c 36). The machinery of civil
          registration, including the office of the Registrar General, had
          been created by the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act
          1836; and the object of the 1852 Act was that certificates of
          places of religious worship made by Protestant dissenters should
          be transmitted, via Superintendent Registrars, to the Registrar
          General for the latter to record them rather than to either the
          bishop or the justices. In providing in section 1, however, that
          the certifying of a place to the Registrar General was to have
          the same force and effect as the certifying of it to the bishop
          or the justices, Parliament may again be said to have implied
          that the legal effect derived from the certificate rather than
          from the Registrar General's subsequent record of it.

      75. According to its preamble, the object of PWRA was modest, namely
          to extend to all religious denominations outside the Church of
          England the procedure, introduced in the case of Protestant
          dissenters by the 1852 Act (which it repealed), for certification
          to the Registrar General instead of to the bishop or the
          justices. But the terms which describe the facility to certify a
          place are different from those found in the Acts of 1688 and
          1812. In para 11 Lord Toulson has set out section 2 of PWRA in
          full. The essence of it is that:

                  "Every place of meeting for religious worship... required
                  to be certified and registered or recorded, as...
                  mentioned [in the 1688 and 1812 Acts], and not heretofore
                  certified and registered or recorded... may be certified
                  in writing to the Registrar General..."

              Section 3 provides that the Registrar General should cause
              all places of meeting for religious worship certified to her
              to be recorded and that "the certifying to [her]... shall...
              have the same force and effect as if such place had been duly
              certified and recorded or registered... as before [the 1852
              Act]".

      76. What should one collect from the terms of sections 2 and 3? On
          the one hand section 3 appears to reaffirm that the legal effect
          derives from the certificate. On the other hand the new language
          of section 2 suggests that the only place which is entitled to be
          certified is one which is (i.e. genuinely is) a place of meeting
          for religious worship. As Lord Toulson has explained in para 24,
          this was the first ground for the rejection of the
          self-certification argument by the Court of Appeal in the 
          Segerdal case, articulated both by Lord Denning MR at p 705 and
          pithily by Buckley LJ at p 709.

      77. The second ground for that court's rejection of the argument, as
          explained by Lord Toulson in para 25, was collected from section
          8 of PWRA, which has no parallel in earlier legislation. It
          provides that, whenever it appears "to the satisfaction of the...
          Registrar General", whether from any notice given to her or
          otherwise, that any certified place of meeting has ceased to be
          used for religious worship, she shall cause the record of it to
          be cancelled and the place "shall cease to be deemed duly
          certified as by law required". Section 8 thus expressly confers
          upon the Registrar General a decision-making function in relation
          to any suggested cessation of the use of a certified place for
          religious worship. One must acknowledge that there is no such
          express reference in sections 2 and 3 to the need for her to be
          "satisfied" that the place is indeed one of religious worship
          before she records a certificate which so claims. Nevertheless
          the stronger point is the paradox which would arise if she had a
          decision-making function in relation to the use of a place of
          religious worship following the recording of a certificate but
          not beforehand.

      78. Three other sections of PWRA tend in my view to confirm that
          sections 2 and 3 confer, albeit not expressly, a decision-making
          function on the Registrar General. Section 4 provides that any
          place which has been certified to, and registered or recorded by,
          the bishop or the justices under the former procedure can be
          certified to, and recorded by, the Registrar General provided
          that it "continues to be used for religious worship". So this
          state of affairs has to exist in fact before the right to
          re-certify arises. Section 6 provides that, if a place certified
          under the 1852 Act has "wholly ceased to be used as a place of
          meeting for religious worship", the certifier is obliged to
          notify the Registrar General. So the obligation arises when, in
          fact, the use has wholly ceased. Section 9 provides that every
          place of meeting for religious worship certified to, and recorded
          by, the Registrar General is exempt from the operation of the
          Charitable Trusts Act 1853 "so long as the same continues to be
          bona fide used as a place of religious worship". The significance
          of this proviso resides in the word "continues", which clearly
          suggests that the place will not have been certified and recorded
          in the first place unless it was then being used, indeed bona
          fide used, as a place of religious worship.

      79. There is a factor in the background which well explains why, by
          PWRA, Parliament should have cast on the Registrar General the
          duty to decide whether a place certified to her is thus
          qualified. It constitutes the third ground for the decision in
          the Segerdal case, as described by Lord Toulson in para 26 above,
          although reference was made to it only by the Divisional Court
          ([1970] 1 QB 430, 441-442) and then only briefly. The factor is
          this: certification had ceased to be only an exercise in
          constructing protection from criminal liability under the Acts of
          1670 and 1812 and had also become a source of valuable
          privileges.

      80. The first such privilege was created by the Poor Rate Exemption
          Act 1833 (3 & 4 Will 4, c 30). It extended the exemption from
          poor rates enjoyed by the Church of England to other places
          exclusively appropriated to public religious worship which had
          been duly certified under the Acts of 1688 or 1812.
          Certification, albeit necessary, was therefore not sufficient to
          secure exemption because the religious worship had also to be
          public and the place had to be exclusively appropriated to it.
          Nevertheless it suddenly became important that a place should not
          be certified, and registered or recorded, unless it actually was
          one of religious worship: see Henning v Church of Jesus Christ of
          Latter-Day Saints [1964] AC 420, 438 (Lord Pearce). Exemption
          from poor rates became even more valuable when section 27 of the
          Highway Act 1835 (5 & 6 Will 4, c 50) provided that it also
          conferred exemption from the highway rate.

      81. On the day in 1836 when it passed the Births, Deaths and
          Marriages Registration Act, Parliament also passed the Marriage
          Act. Apart from introducing, by section 21, the facility to marry
          in a register office before one of the new Superintendent
          Registrars, the Act, by section 18, conferred an important extra
          privilege on places of religious worship certified under the Acts
          of 1688 or 1812. It was that the proprietor of a certified place
          could apply to the Registrar General for the building to be
          registered for the solemnisation of marriages. His application
          had to be accompanied by a fresh certificate, signed on this
          occasion by at least 20 householders, that they had used the
          building for at least a year as their usual place of public
          religious worship. This procedure for a second certificate
          leading to a different sort of registration, namely for the
          solemnisation of marriages, was imported, with very few changes,
          into section 41 of the Marriage Act 1949 ("the 1949 Act") which
          remains in force. Back in 1836 it underlined the importance that
          the first certificate, on which therefore the entitlement to
          solemnise marriages in part depended, should have related to a
          place which was indeed one of religious worship.

      82. I have referred in para 78 above to the exemption of certified
          and recorded places from the operation of the Charitable Trusts
          Act 1853 conferred by section 9 of PWRA and (I should add) prior
          thereto by section 62 of the 1853 Act itself. This was yet a
          further privilege for certified and recorded places in that those
          conducting worship there were exempt from the obligation cast by
          section 61 of the 1853 Act to file annual accounts. The exemption
          placed an extra premium on the importance that a certificate
          should not be recorded unless it related to a place which was
          indeed one of religious worship.

      83. It may be said that the Registrar General is unlikely to have any
          particular expertise in making a sometimes difficult
          determination, albeit subject to court review, whether what
          occurs in a place is "worship" and, if so, whether it is
          "religious"; and that therefore it is improbable that Parliament
          would have imposed such a duty upon her. Forty years ago
          consideration at a high level was given to her apparent lack of
          expertise in this regard. On 10 April 1973 the Law Commission
          published a report on the Solemnisation of Marriage in England
          and Wales (1973) (Law Com No 53), to which was annexed the report
          of a working party, set up under the chairmanship of Mr Justice
          Scarman in order to inquire into the suitability of the current
          requirements for solemnisation of marriages. The working party
          made a powerful recommendation, endorsed by the Law Commission
          but not to date reflected in legislation, that the procedures
          first of recording under PWRA and then of registering under the
          1949 Act should be amalgamated. But, clearly proceeding on the
          basis that the decision in the Segerdal case had been correct,
          the working party proceeded to observe, at paras 70 and 76, that
          in any event someone would have to continue to decide whether the
          place was one of religious worship and that, although the task
          was more suited to a theologian than to a civil servant, it was
          unable to suggest any other person or body which would be likely
          to be not only better qualified to undertake it but also as
          generally acceptable as the Registrar General.

      84. In the above I have set out my reasons for having concluded that
          in the Segerdal case the Court of Appeal was correct to reject
          the argument that the procedure under PWRA is one of
          self-certification. But I add, only by way of postscript, that I
          have reached that conclusion with some relief. For it seems clear
          that, in enacting the Marriage Act 1994 ("the 1994 Act"),
          Parliament itself also acted on the basis that the decision in
          the Segerdal case had been correct and that therefore a place of
          religious worship would need to be properly so called before it
          could qualify for recording under PWRA and, following the second
          certificate, for registration as a building for the solemnisation
          of marriages under the 1949 Act. In introducing a facility to
          enter into a civil marriage on approved premises, hedged around
          by regulations governing approval and by a requirement (greatly
          relaxed in the case of a wedding in a registered building:
          section 43 of the 1949 Act) for the presence at the wedding of
          both the Superintendent Registrar and the local Registrar (see
          sections 46A and 46B of the 1949 Act, inserted by section 1 of
          the 1994 Act), Parliament in 1994 clearly proceeded on the basis
          that a building would secure registration for the solemnisation
          of marriages under section 41 only if it truly was a place of
          public religious worship. Otherwise its requirement of approval
          of premises could be circumvented by false certification under
          PWRA and the 1949 Act.