          Summary


          Hilary Term
          [2013] UKSC 9
          On appeal from: [2012] EWCA Civ 380


          JUDGMENT

              In the matter of J (Children)

          before

          Lord Hope, Deputy President
          Lady Hale
          Lord Clarke
          Lord Wilson
          Lord Sumption
          Lord Reed
          Lord Carnwath

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          20 February 2013

          Heard on 17 and 18 December 2012

      Appellant
      Stephen Cobb QC
      Justin Gray
      (Instructed by Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council) 	  	Respondent
      Paul Storey QC
      Martin Todd
      (Instructed by Wollen Michelmore Solicitors)
        	  	 
        	  	Respondent
      Pamela Scriven QC
      Ben Boucher-Giles
      (Instructed by Leigh Turton Dixon)

          LADY HALE

   1. In a free society, it is a serious thing indeed for the state
      compulsorily to remove a child from his family of birth. Interference
      with the right to respect for family life, protected by article 8 of
      the European Convention on Human Rights, can only be justified by a
      pressing social need. Yet it is also a serious thing for the state to
      fail to safeguard its children from the neglect and ill-treatment
      which they may suffer in their own homes. This may even amount to a
      violation of their right not to be subjected to inhuman or degrading
      treatment, protected by article 3 of the Convention. How then is the
      law to protect the family from unwarranted intrusion while at the
      same time protecting children from harm?

   2. In England and Wales, the Children Act 1989 tries to balance these
      two objectives by setting a threshold which must be crossed before a
      court can consider what order, if any, should be made to enable the
      authorities to protect a child. The threshold is designed to restrict
      compulsory intervention to cases which genuinely warrant it, while
      enabling the court to make the order which will best promote the
      child's welfare once the threshold has been crossed. That threshold
      is defined by section 31(2) of the Act as follows:

              "A court may only make a care order or supervision order if
              it is satisfied –

                  (a) that the child concerned is suffering, or is likely
                  to suffer, significant harm; and

                  (b) that the harm, or likelihood of harm, is attributable
                  to –

                      (i) the care given to the child, or likely to be
                      given to him if the order were not made, not being
                      what it would be reasonable to expect a parent to
                      give to him; or

                      (ii) the child's being beyond parental control."

      Once that threshold is crossed, section 1(1) of the Act requires the
      court to treat the welfare of the child as its paramount
      consideration, having regard to the checklist of factors listed in
      section 1(3). These include "any harm which [the child] has suffered
      or is at risk of suffering" (section 1(3)(e)). There are therefore
      three questions to be answered in any care case: first, is there harm
      or a likelihood of harm; second, to what is that harm or likelihood
      of harm attributable; and third, what will be best for the child?

   3. It is some indication of the importance of the issues that the
      apparently simple words of section 31(2) have been considered by the
      House of Lords and the Supreme Court in no less than six cases: In re
      M (A Minor) (Care Orders: Threshold Conditions) [1994] 2 AC 424; In
      re H (Minors) (Sexual Abuse: Standard of Proof) [1996] AC 563; 
      Lancashire County Council v B [2000] 2 AC 147; In re O (Minors)
      (Care: Preliminary Hearing) [2003] UKHL 18, [2004] 1 AC 523; In re B
      (Children) (Care Proceedings: Standard of Proof) (CAFCASS
      intervening) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] AC 11; and In re S-B (Children)
      (Care Proceedings: Standard of Proof) [2009] UKSC 17, [2010] 1 AC 678
      . In re M was concerned with the first limb of the first question:
      what is meant by "is suffering" significant harm? We are concerned
      with the second limb of that question: what is meant by "likely to
      suffer" significant harm?

   4. A child may be protected, not only if he is actually suffering harm
      as a result of a lack of reasonable parental care, but also if it is
      likely that he will do so in the future. But how is a court to be
      satisfied that it is likely that this particular child – the child
      concerned - will suffer significant harm in the future? It has twice
      been held in the House of Lords that the mere possibility, however
      real, that another child may have been harmed in the past by a person
      who is now looking after the child with whom the court is now
      concerned is not sufficient. The court has to be satisfied on the
      balance of probabilities that this person actually did harm that
      other child: see In re H [1996] AC 563 and In re B [2009] AC 11. But
      in both those cases, it was not established that the other child had
      been harmed at all. The issue in this case is whether it makes a
      difference that another child has indeed been harmed in the past and
      there is a possibility that this parent was responsible for that
      harm.

   5. Before turning to the facts and the arguments in this case, it should
      be emphasised that in the real world the issue hardly ever comes
      packaged in this simple way. There are usually many readily provable
      facts upon which an authority can rely to satisfy the court that a
      child is likely to suffer significant harm unless something is done
      to protect him. Cases in which the only thing upon which the
      authority can rely is the possibility that this parent has harmed
      another child in the past are very rare. As the Court of Appeal
      pointed out, this case has itself been artificially constructed by
      the decision to treat the issue as a preliminary question of law: 
      [2012] EWCA Civ 380, [2012] 3 WLR 952, para 81. Who can say what
      facts the court might have found relevant had the history been fully
      investigated in the usual way?

          The history

   6. There are three children concerned in this case: HJ, a girl born on
      20 June 2005, so now aged seven years and seven months; TJ, a boy
      born on 17 August 2006, so now aged six years and five months; and
      IJ, a girl born on 19 July 2009, so now aged three years and six
      months. The two eldest, HJ and TJ are the children of DJ, the second
      respondent, and his former partner, SC. They have been looked after
      by their father for the whole of their lives, having remained in his
      care when their mother left in 2008.

   7. IJ is the daughter of JJ, the first respondent, with whom DJ formed a
      relationship in 2008. It was originally thought that DJ was the
      father of IJ, but DNA testing established that her father is SW, with
      whom JJ had earlier had a relationship. IJ has been part of the
      family unit with DJ, HJ and TJ for the whole of her life. Her mother,
      JJ, also formed part of that family unit for 20 months after IJ was
      born. Then in March 2011, the local authority formed a child
      protection plan which required her to move out of the family home,
      which she did. The local authority issued care proceedings in respect
      of all three children in April 2011. DJ and JJ married in June 2011
      and have since had a child together, RJ, who was born on 1 December
      2011.

   8. The local authority quite properly took steps to protect the three
      older children after being made aware by another local authority of
      the findings of Judge Masterman in earlier care proceedings relating
      to JJ's second child, S, who was born on 13 August 2005. Those
      proceedings were brought because of the death of her first-born
      child, T-L, when T-L was only three weeks old. T-L was born on 9
      March 2004 and discharged from hospital two days later. When T-L died
      on 29 March 2004, she was found to have multiple fractures to her
      ribs, caused on at least two occasions, bruising to her left jaw,
      right side of her face, left shoulder and left inner elbow, all
      caused non-accidentally, and serious and untreated nappy rash. She
      had died as a result of asphyxia caused either by a deliberate act or
      by SW taking her to bed with him and JJ leaving her in SW's care.
      Both were held to have colluded to hide the truth. In the
      circumstances, the judge found that "singling out a likely
      perpetrator does not help this couple because it must be debateable
      as to which is worse, to inflict this injury or to protect the person
      responsible".

   9. Following Judge Masterman's judgment of 24 May 2006, JJ and SW
      withdrew from contact with S and eventually consented to his being
      adopted outside the family. They remained in a relationship until
      August 2007, when SW committed an assault upon JJ to which he
      eventually pleaded guilty at Cardiff Crown Court in June 2008. This
      was by no means the first occasion known to the local authority upon
      which SW had been violent towards JJ.

  10. The current care proceedings were transferred to the High Court in
      September 2011, for determination as a preliminary issue whether the
      local authority could rely upon Judge Masterman's findings to cross
      the threshold in section 31(2) of the Children Act 1989. By the time
      that this issue came to be tried by Judge Hallam in November 2011,
      the local authority had conceded that "the only matter that could
      meet the threshold criteria, at the relevant time, are the findings .
      . . as to the physical injuries sustained by T-L. They do not seek to
      bring failure to protect into the equation". Hence the issue Judge
      Hallam had to determine was "whether JJ's inclusion in a pool of
      perpetrators in earlier proceedings involving a different child and a
      different relationship can form the basis of the threshold in
      relation to a subsequent child in later proceedings".

  11. After examining the earlier authorities, Judge Hallam concluded that
      "the likelihood of significant harm . . . can only be proved by
      reference to past facts which are proved on the balance of
      probabilities". The only facts available to the local authority had
      not been proved to that standard. Hence the threshold was not met and
      the proceedings were dismissed. Following this judgment, JJ returned
      to the family home, where she has remained ever since. No proceedings
      have been taken in respect of RJ, who was born shortly after the
      judgment.

  12. Judge Hallam did remark that she was "aware that the present law does
      cause consternation for local authorities, professionals involved in
      the protection of children and academic commentators. However, it is
      quite apparent that the higher courts have considered those concerns
      and taken them into account in reaching their decisions". The local
      authority appealed to the Court of Appeal, which reached the same
      conclusion in April 2012. However, the Court of Appeal took the
      unusual step of itself granting the local authority permission to
      appeal to this court. Giving the leading judgment, McFarlane LJ
      commented that "Artificially to limit the judicial exercise in a
      manner which invites the court to ignore part of the evidence in the
      case, might well set up the legal point for determination in a
      clinically clear and legally accessible manner, but it cannot, in my
      view, represent a proper exercise of the judicial task" (para 81).

  13. While I would not criticise the local authority for agreeing to
      isolate the issue in this way, that comment does underline the
      unreality of the question with which this court, in common with Judge
      Hallam and the Court of Appeal, has been presented. The unreality is
      further illustrated by the way in which Mr Stephen Cobb QC, on behalf
      of the appellant local authority, has framed the issue as a choice
      between two extremes:

              "Where a previous court has found that there is a real
              possibility that one or other or both of two or more carers
              have perpetrated significant harm on a child in his or her
              care, is that 'finding' a 'finding of fact' that may be
              relied upon in subsequent proceedings relating to only one of
              the potential perpetrators in support of a conclusion that
              there is a real possibility or likelihood of a subsequent
              child in a new family unit of which he or she is part
              suffering significant harm or is it a 'finding' that must be
              totally ignored in the subsequent proceedings?"

      As will be seen, this is not the only way of framing the issue.

          The authorities

  14. The leading authorities are well-known and have been reviewed many
      times, most recently by this court in In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678.
      However, as Mr Cobb correctly observes, they were not reviewed with
      this precise issue in mind and it is therefore necessary to consider
      them briefly once more.

  15. The starting point is the decision in In re H [1996] AC 563. The
      proceedings concerned three young girls whose elder sister alleged
      that she had been sexually abused by their mother's partner, her
      step-father and the father of the two youngest girls, from the age of
      seven or eight. The judge did not find the allegations proved but
      held that there was a real possibility that they were true. As this
      was the only basis upon which it was suggested that it was likely
      that the other children would suffer harm in the future, the case was
      dismissed. The decision of the ouse of HouHouse of Lords is authority
      for three important propositions: first, that the standard of proof
      of such allegations is the simple balance of probabilities; second,
      that "likely" in section 31(2) does not mean "more likely than not";
      rather, it means likely "in the sense of a real possibility, a
      possibility that cannot sensibly be ignored having regard to the
      nature and gravity of the feared harm in the particular case" (per
      Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead at p 585F); third, however, "A decision
      by a court on the likelihood of a future happening must be founded on
      a basis of present facts and the inferences fairly to be drawn
      therefrom" (p 590A); unresolved judicial doubts and suspicions "can
      no more form the basis of a conclusion that the second [likelihood of
      harm] threshold condition in section 31(2)(a) has been established
      than they can form the basis of a conclusion that the first [present
      harm] has been established" (p 589E).

  16. The third proposition was held only by a majority of three to two but
      has been reaffirmed in two later decisions at this level. In In re B 
      [2009] AC 11, the essential facts were very similar to those in In re
      H. Care proceedings were brought in respect of three children,
      because the oldest of the three, a 16-year-old girl, alleged that
      their mother's husband, her step-father and the father of the two
      younger children, had sexually abused her and physically abused both
      her and her elder brother. The judge could not decide that it was
      more likely than not that the girl was telling the truth, but nor
      could he decide that it was more likely than not that the husband was
      telling the truth. Hence those allegations could not form the basis
      of a conclusion that the children were likely to suffer harm in the
      future. On appeal, the children's guardian, with the support of the
      local authority, invited the House of Lords to over-turn the decision
      in In re H in favour of a test that there was a "real possibility"
      that certain events had happened. The House unanimously and
      unhesitatingly declined that invitation (per Baroness Hale of
      Richmond at paras 53-54). The "thoroughly convincing" reasons given
      by Lord Nicholls were summarised thus (para 54):

              "The threshold is there to protect both the children and
              their parents from unjustified intervention in their lives.
              It would provide no protection at all if it could be
              established on the basis of unsubstantiated suspicions: that
              is, where a judge cannot say that there is no real
              possibility that abuse took place, so concludes that there is
              a real possibility that it did. In other words, the alleged
              perpetrator would have to prove that it did not. Mr Cobb [for
              the children] accepts that it must be proved on the balance
              of probabilities that the child 'is suffering' significant
              harm. But nevertheless he argues that those same allegations,
              which could not be proved for that purpose, could be the
              basis of a finding of likelihood of future harm. If that were
              so, there would have been no need for the first limb of
              section 31(2)(a) at all. Parliament must be presumed to have
              inserted it for a purpose. Furthermore the Act draws a clear
              distinction between the threshold to be crossed before the
              court may make a final care or supervision order and the
              threshold for making preliminary and interim orders. If
              Parliament had intended that a mere suspicion that a child
              had suffered harm could form the basis for making a final
              order, it would have used the same terminology of 'reasonable
              grounds to suspect' or 'reasonable grounds to believe"'.

  17. The House also reaffirmed and clarified that the standard of proof
      was the simple balance of probabilities. No more severe standard was
      to be applied because of the seriousness of the allegations. The
      inherent probabilities were only part of deciding what was more
      likely than not to have happened. As Lord Hoffmann pointed out (at
      para 15), assaulting children is a serious matter, but if it is clear
      that the child has indeed been assaulted, it makes no sense to say
      that neither of the possible perpetrators is likely to have done it.
      The fact is that one of them did and the task is to decide whether it
      is more probable that one rather than the other was responsible.

  18. In neither In re H nor In re B had the question of identifying a
      perpetrator arisen. The "real possibility" under discussion was
      whether or not the alleged abuse had taken place at all. But the
      question did arise in In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678, a judgment of this
      court to which seven Justices subscribed. The case concerned two
      children. The older child, J, was found to have sustained
      non-accidental bruising to his face and arms at the age of only four
      weeks. The judge found it likely that only one parent had been
      responsible and there was no question of the other having failed to
      protect the child. She concluded that neither parent could be ruled
      out as the perpetrator of the injuries, although she later indicated
      a 60% likelihood that it was the father. The parents had separated
      while the proceedings were going on and their younger child, W, was
      born before the hearing. He had never come to any harm, having been
      removed from his mother at birth. Nevertheless, the judge concluded
      that, because there was a real possibility that the mother had
      injured J, there was also a real possibility that she would injure W
      in future.

  19. The principal point in the case was the standard of proof to be
      applied in identifying the perpetrator of injuries which are found to
      have been non-accidental. The court reaffirmed that this was the
      simple balance of probabilities, and pointed to the very real
      advantages of making such a finding where it was possible to do so
      (paras 36 to 38). The judge had applied too high a standard and it
      was not possible to treat her later 60% indication as a positive
      finding that the father was the perpetrator. Hence the case was sent
      back to be re-heard.

  20. In relation to the younger child, W, there was another reason to
      remit the case (para 49):

              'The judge found the threshold crossed in relation to [W] on
              the basis that there was a real possibility that the mother
              had injured [J]. That, as already explained, is not a
              permissible approach to a finding of likelihood of future
              harm. It was established in In re H [1996] AC 563 and
              confirmed in In re O [2004] 1 AC 523 that a prediction of
              future harm has to be based upon findings of actual fact made
              on the balance of probabilities. It is only once those facts
              have been found that the degree of likelihood of future
              events becomes the 'real possibility' test adopted in In re
              H. It might have been open to the judge to find the threshold
              crossed in relation to [W] on a different basis but she did
              not do so.'

      My view remains that the need for the local authority to prove the
      facts which give rise to a real possibility of significant harm in
      the future is a bulwark against too ready an interference with family
      life on the part of the state. And, subject to the caveat that the
      court received no argument on the impact of article 8 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights, I incline to the view that nothing less
      than a factual foundation would justify such grave interference with
      the rights of the child and the parents thereunder to respect for
      their family life: see Olsson v Sweden (1989) 11 EHRR 259, in which,
      at paras 67 and 68 (which it has cited with approval on many
      subsequent occasions), the European Court of Human Rights stressed
      that a child's removal into care was justified only if it was
      necessary in a democratic society in the sense that it corresponded
      to a pressing social need and was based on reasons which were
      relevant and sufficient.

  21. One reason for that "consternation" may be that paragraph 49 is
      inconsistent with some observations of Wall J in In re B (Minors)
      (Care Proceedings: Practice) [1999] 1 WLR 238. The case concerned
      two-year-old twins, CB and JB, one of whom, CB, had suffered shaking
      injuries on two occasions. The judge found that the mother had shaken
      the child on the second of those occasions, so (the father being off
      the scene) there was a proper factual basis for concluding that the
      threshold criteria were met in relation to both children.
      Nevertheless, the judge went on to observe that they would have been
      met even if he had been unable to decide who was responsible for the
      shaking. His basis for doing so appeared to be that, as "likely"
      means a "real possibility", "there must therefore, in my judgment, be
      a possibility which cannot sensibly be ignored that if JB were left
      in the care of his parents – or either of them – he too will suffer
      significant harm" (p 248E). With the greatest of respect to the
      undoubted wisdom and experience of the judge, that reasoning fails to
      distinguish between the degree of likelihood required by the word
      "likely" and the factual findings required to satisfy the court of
      that likelihood, a distinction which was clearly drawn by the House
      of Lords in the later case of In re B [2009] AC 11.

  22. It is also suggested that para 49 of In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678 is
      inconsistent with the two other cases which, together with In re H 
      [1996] AC 563, make up a "trilogy" of House of Lords cases in which
      the leading opinion was given by Lord Nicholls. The second in the
      trilogy is Lancashire County Council v B [2000] 2 AC 147. The House
      of Lords was not concerned with the basis for predicting the
      likelihood of future harm for the purpose of section 31(2)(a) but
      with the proper interpretation of the second part of the threshold
      test, the "attributability" criterion in section 31(2)(b). A
      seven-month-old baby had suffered injury from having been violently
      shaken on at least two occasions. Care proceedings were brought in
      relation to that child and also in relation to the child of a
      child-minder who looked after the injured child during working hours.
      The judge found that the injuries had been caused either by the
      mother, or by the father, or by the child-minder, but he could not
      identify the perpetrator. He concluded that the threshold criteria
      were not met in respect of either child, but the Court of Appeal and
      the House of Lords held that they were met in respect of the injured
      child. However, the Court of Appeal held that they were not met in
      respect of the child-minder's child and permission to appeal that
      decision out of time to the House of Lords was refused.

  23. The House held that it was not necessary, for the purpose of section
      31(2)(b), to make a finding that an individual parent whose parental
      responsibility would be curtailed by the order was responsible for
      the harm suffered. It was enough that the harm was attributable to
      the care given to the child not being what it ought to have been.
      What was meant by the "care given to the child"? Did it refer only to
      the care given by the parents, or by other primary carers, or by
      anyone who was looking after the child? The House held that it
      referred principally to the child's primary carers, but where, as
      here, the care of the child was shared, it could also embrace those
      who shared that care (at p 166B-D). This might mean that the
      attributability condition was satisfied when there was no more than a
      possibility that the parents were responsible (at p 166F).

  24. Hence, it is now argued, the same should apply to the likelihood of
      harm condition in section 31(2)(a). If a parent can fall foul of the
      attributability criterion when there is no more than a possibility
      that she has harmed the child, why should she not fall foul of the
      likelihood criterion in the same circumstances?

  25. However, the Lancashire case was not about the likelihood criterion.
      There is nothing in the House of Lords' decision in the case to cast
      doubt upon the decision of the Court of Appeal (albeit reached with
      no enthusiasm) that the likelihood criterion in section 31(2)(a) was 
      not met in relation to the child-minder's child. That child had not
      suffered any harm at all. The risk of future harm could be
      established only on the basis of proven facts, not mere suspicion. It
      was clear that the parents of the injured child would play no part in
      the child's care in the future. It had not been established on the
      balance of probabilities that the child-minder was the perpetrator of
      the injuries (per Robert Walker LJ at p155F-G).

  26. The decision of the Court of Appeal in the Lancashire case is, of
      course, in line with para 49 of the judgment of this court in In re
      S-B [2010] 1 AC 678. In In re F (Interim Care Order) [2011] EWCA Civ
      258, [2011] 2 FLR 856, the Court of Appeal held, on similar facts,
      that it was bound to dismiss the local authority's appeal. The child
      concerned was a baby, C, born in June 2010, who had come to no harm:
      indeed the hearing took place only three days after he was born.
      Proceedings were brought because, in 2004, his father had been party
      to care proceedings involving his child, J, by a different woman. At
      the age of six months, J had suffered two fractures to the right leg
      on separate occasions. The judge found that either the mother or the
      father was responsible and in relation to the second fracture the
      other parent had failed to protect J. But (as in this case) the local
      authority in the current proceedings relied only on the real
      possibility that the father was the perpetrator of J's injuries and
      not upon any failure to protect.

  27. In refusing the local authority permission to appeal to the Supreme
      Court, Wilson LJ referred both to the Lancashire case and to para 49
      of In re S-B. He observed that "the strict status of that passage as 
      obiter carries very little significance in circumstances in which it
      is all of a piece with a number of earlier, yet also recent,
      decisions of the House of Lords" (para 14). After referring to the
      "consternation" caused by para 49, he continued, "No doubt there are
      hard and worrying cases. But the requirement of proven factual
      foundation is a bulwark against the state's removal of a child from
      his family, which I consider very precious. I also applaud the
      Supreme Court's regular acknowledgement of the fact that, although it
      can depart from its previous decisions, the exercise of departure is
      highly unsettling for the law and should be undertaken only with
      great caution" (para 15).

  28. The application for permission to appeal was not renewed before this
      court, perhaps because the local authority had since launched new
      proceedings alleging that the threshold was crossed on an entirely
      different basis (current drug-taking by the parents). Should the
      threshold be crossed on that basis, the question might arise as to
      the relevance of the inclusion of the father in a (small) pool of
      possible perpetrators of the injuries to J at the so-called "welfare"
      stage of the inquiry, where the court is considering what order if
      any, will best promote the welfare of the child. Wilson LJ raised the
      question, which he clearly regarded as causing difficulties for a
      trial judge, but it was unnecessary to answer it in the
      circumstances.

  29. The third case in the "trilogy", In re O [2004] 1 AC 523, was
      concerned with the welfare stage of the inquiry. There were two
      separate appeals. In one case, a child had suffered serious injuries;
      the father admitted responsibility for one of them; but the judge
      held that neither parent could be excluded as a possible perpetrator
      of the others. The Court of Appeal held that the case should proceed
      on the basis that there was no risk, either to the injured child or
      to a younger child, from the mother. In the other case, a child had
      died as a result of serious injuries which the judge found had been
      inflicted by the mother's partner. A differently constituted Court of
      Appeal found that there was insufficient evidence that the mother's
      partner was the sole perpetrator, so the judge at the welfare hearing
      would not be able to disregard the risk to the surviving child
      presented by the mother.

  30. Lord Nicholls re-iterated the principles already established in In re
      H and Lancashire County Council v B: that in considering the
      likelihood of future harm for the purpose of section 31(2)(a), the
      court had to act only on the basis of proven facts (para 17); that
      "likely" meant a real possibility; and that the care given to the
      child for the purpose of section 31(2)(b) included the care given by
      any of the child's carers so that the threshold could be crossed even
      though the identity of the perpetrator was not known (para 19). It
      was in that connection, and not in connection with the "likelihood"
      criterion, that Lord Nicholls (para 20) referred with apparent
      approval to what Wall J had said in In re B [1999] 1 WLR 238, 248.

  31. He went on to hold that, once it had been proved, to the requisite
      standard, that a child had suffered harm or was likely to do so (para
      26), the court could take into account at the welfare stage the
      inclusion of the parent in a pool of possible perpetrators of the
      child's injuries. It would be "grotesque" to proceed on the basis
      that the child was at risk from neither parent (para 27). The
      importance to be attached to this, as to any other feature, would
      depend upon the circumstances of the case (para 31).

  32. On the other hand, Lord Nicholls went on to discuss, albeit obiter,
      whether unproven allegations of harm could be taken into account at
      the welfare stage and held that they could not (para 38). This
      accorded with the approach of the Court of Appeal in In re M and R
      (Child Abuse: Evidence) [1996] 2 FLR 195 (para 39): it would be
      extraordinary if Parliament intended that evidence insufficient to
      establish harm for the purpose of section 31(2)(a) should be
      sufficient to establish harm for the purpose of section 1(3)(e) (para
      40).

  33. Once again, therefore, it is argued that, if inclusion in a pool of
      possible perpetrators can be taken into account (with whatever
      difficulty in assessing its importance) both for the purposes of the
      attributability criterion and at the welfare stage of the inquiry,
      then why can it not be taken into account for the purposes of the
      likelihood criterion in section 31(2)(a)? Once again, however, there
      is nothing in In re O to cast doubt upon the necessity for founding a
      prediction of future harm upon a proven factual basis. Lord Nicholls
      went out of his way to reiterate the necessity for this. It is also
      striking that, although both appeals were concerned with a child who
      had not (yet) been harmed, there was no discussion of the basis upon
      which the threshold had been crossed in their cases. Thus there was
      no discussion of whether or not the possible perpetrators remained
      members of the same household at the relevant time: clearly, if one
      child has suffered harm at the hands of one of two parents who remain
      members of the same household, it is possible (though not inevitable)
      to infer that another child in that household is also likely to
      suffer harm. Furthermore, the discussion of the relevance of
      inclusion in the pool at the welfare stage was all in the context of
      proven harm to the child concerned.

  34. Finally, reference should be made to the case of North Yorkshire
      County Council v SA [2003] EWCA Civ 839, [2003] 2 FLR 849. This too
      was not a case about the "likelihood" criterion. The child concerned
      had suffered serious non-accidental injuries. The case was about the
      identification of the pool of possible perpetrators for the purpose
      of the later stages of the inquiry. The court held that a "no
      possibility" test, ruling out only those people who could not be
      perpetrators, cast the net far too wide. The court preferred the test
      of including only those where there was a "likelihood or real
      possibility" that they were responsible (para 26). In doing so, Dame
      Elizabeth Butler-Sloss P referred to the opinion of Lord Nicholls in 
      In re O [2004] 1 AC 523, and expressed the view that the "real
      possibility" test which he had applied at the welfare stage should
      also be applied at the section 31(2) part of the case (para 21). Once
      again, however, this was not a case about predicting the likelihood
      of future harm. It was about identifying the pool of possible
      perpetrators at the attributability and welfare stages. Its approach
      at that stage was expressly approved by this court in In re S-B 
      [2010] 1 AC 678, at para 43.

  35. It is worth remembering that all of these cases, in which the judge
      (or the Court of Appeal) found it impossible to identify a
      perpetrator, were decided before the decision of the House of Lords
      in In re B [2009] AC 11. That includes the decision of Judge
      Masterman in the earlier proceedings which led to this case. As was
      apparent in In re B, until that case was decided, the opinion of Lord
      Nicholls in In re H [1996] AC 563 had frequently been misinterpreted
      so as to require a higher standard of proof where the allegations
      made were serious. The nostrum had taken hold that "the more serious
      the allegation, the more cogent the evidence needed to prove it": In
      re B [2009] AC 11, para 64. Reference had been made to In re H in two
      House of Lords cases which were concerned with two quite different
      statutes: see B v Chief Constable of Avon and Somerset Constabulary 
      [2001] 1 WLR 340 (concerning sex offender orders) and R (McCann) v
      Crown Court at Manchester [2003] 1 AC 787 (concerning anti-social
      behaviour orders). These had led to suggestions that in care
      proceedings there was a "heightened standard of proof" and even that
      the difference between the criminal and civil standards was "largely
      illusory". Those suggestions were firmly rejected by the Court of
      Appeal in In re U (A Child) (Department for Education and Skills
      intervening) [2005] Fam 134, and equally firmly by the House of Lords
      in In re B [2009] AC 11.

  36. Hence, in In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678, this court re-iterated that the
      simple balance of probabilities was the test for the identification
      of a perpetrator. There were cases where the judge might find this
      difficult, and he was under no obligation to do so if he could not.
      But there were particular benefits in doing so if he could. It would
      promote clarity in future planning for the child (para 36). It would
      also enable the professionals to work with the family on the basis of
      the judge's findings (para 37). And it would help the child in due
      course to understand and come to terms with what had happened and why
      he might have been removed from his family (para 38).

  37. It may well be that a misunderstanding of the standard of proof has
      been responsible for some of the difficulties. Trial judges have felt
      themselves unable to decide which parent was responsible for harming
      a child. This did not matter too much at the attributability and
      welfare stages, although it was bound to make the task of deciding
      what would be best for the child much more difficult, especially if
      the parents had separated after the harm was done. It clearly did
      matter at the stage of deciding whether another child was likely to
      suffer significant harm, but trial judges will no doubt have taken
      comfort from the dicta of Wall J in In re B [1999] 1 WLR 238 until
      the basis for predicting likelihood came before the House once more
      in In re B [2009] AC 11 and In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678.

          Criminal and Civil law

  38. It is also argued that the approach established in the care cases,
      culminating in In re S-B, is out of step with the modern approach in
      criminal and civil law where it is clear that harm has been suffered
      but not clear who has caused it. Section 5 of the Domestic Violence,
      Crime and Victims Act 2004 (as amended in 2012) creates the offence
      of causing or allowing a child (or vulnerable adult) to die or suffer
      serious physical harm. If a child dies or suffers serious physical
      harm as a result of the unlawful act of a member of the child's
      household who has frequent contact with the child, and there was at
      the time a significant risk of serious physical harm being caused to
      the child by such a person, then such a person is guilty of an
      offence if either (i) he or she was the person whose act caused the
      death or serious physical harm or (ii) he or she was or ought to have
      been aware of the significant risk, failed to take such steps as he
      or she could reasonably have been expected to take to protect the
      child from the risk, and the act occurred in circumstances of the
      kind that he or she foresaw or ought to have foreseen. The
      prosecution does not have to prove whether it is (i) or (ii), thus
      getting round the well-known problem that if a child was seriously
      injured or died at the hands of one of his parents, but it could not
      be proved which, both had to be acquitted: see, for example, R v Lane 
      (1986) 82 Cr App R 5.

  39. It will be immediately apparent that child care law already protects
      the child who is injured in such circumstances. He has suffered
      significant harm attributable to the care given to him not being what
      it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to him. As the 
      Lancashire case [2002] 2 AC 147 made clear, it is not necessary to
      identify the perpetrator of the harm in order to cross the threshold.
      Furthermore, child care law will protect another child who is a
      member of the same household where the other child was injured.

  40. The criminal law is only concerned with punishing those who bear some
      responsibility, either directly or through a failure to protect from
      predictable harm, for a death or serious injury which has actually
      taken place. It does place a duty upon those looking after a child to
      protect him from the foreseeable risk of serious harm caused by
      others in the household. But child care law already does the same. A
      parent who fails to protect her child not only stands to lose that
      child but also stands to have that failure taken into account in
      predicting risks to other children. The criminal law is not
      addressing the question with which we are concerned, which is how the
      likelihood of future harm can reliably be predicted.

  41. Developments in the civil law are even less in point. In Fairchild v
      Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 AC 32, the
      House of Lords created an exception to the general principle that a
      person who has suffered harm as a result of a breach of duty can only
      recover damages against a person who can be shown to have caused or
      contributed to that harm. That exception applies only where the
      claimant has contracted mesothelioma, has been exposed to asbestos
      from more than one source, and it cannot be shown which source was
      responsible for the disease. Any defendant who has wrongfully exposed
      the claimant to asbestos is liable. But in Sienkiewicz v Greif (UK)
      Ltd [2011] UKSC 10, [2011] 2 AC 229, the Supreme Court made it clear
      that this is a special rule, created only because of the special
      difficulty of proving causation in mesothelioma cases. It can
      scarcely be described as the herald of a brave new world in which
      people may be held liable for harm whether or not they have caused
      it.

  42. In any event, like the criminal law, the civil law is looking to the
      past, not the future. It seeks to compensate for harm already done,
      not to predict whether harm is likely in the future.

          Discussion

  43. As this review has shown, there is no inconsistency between para 49
      of In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678 and any of the earlier House of Lords
      authorities. On the contrary, although it addresses a different
      factual situation from those addressed in In re H [1996] AC 563 and 
      In re B [2009] AC 11, it is entirely consistent with them in
      principle. Nor is it inconsistent with developments in the criminal
      and civil law. In my view, it represents a correct statement of the
      law, and should be followed in preference to the obiter dicta of Wall
      J in Re B [1999] 1 WLR 238, 248.

  44. Time and again, the cases have stressed that the threshold conditions
      are there to protect both the child and his family from unwarranted
      interference by the state. There must be a clearly established
      objective basis for such interference. Without it, there would be no
      "pressing social need" for the state to interfere in the family life
      enjoyed by the child and his parents which is protected by article 8
      of the ECHR. Reasonable suspicion is a sufficient basis for the
      authorities to investigate and even to take interim protective
      measures, but it cannot be a sufficient basis for the long term
      intervention, frequently involving permanent placement outside the
      family, which is entailed in a care order.

  45. That view is supported by the legislative history. The single
      threshold contained in the Children Act 1989 replaced the many
      separate criteria for taking or keeping children away from their
      families which were contained in the previous law. Most care
      proceedings were brought in juvenile courts under section 1 of the
      Children and Young Persons Act 1969. This contained a list of
      specific grounds for making care orders, two of which catered for the
      likelihood of future harm: where it was probable that this child
      would suffer harm in future, either because another child in the same
      household had already been harmed, or because a person who had been
      convicted of harming another child had joined the household. During
      the 1970s, however, local authorities increasingly resorted to taking
      children into care by making them wards of court: the High Court
      (along with the divorce courts) had power, "in exceptional
      circumstances making it impracticable or undesirable" for the child
      to be cared for by his parents or any other individual, to commit a
      ward to the care of a local authority: section 7(2) of the Family Law
      Reform Act 1969.

  46. The Review of Child Care Law: Report to Ministers of an
      Interdepartmental Working Party (1985) (DHSS), which led to the 1989
      Act, rejected a broad welfare test, because it would not offer the
      degree of statutory protection against unwarranted interference which
      the preceding House of Commons Select Committee Report on Children in
      Care had considered essential (para 15.10). The Review also rejected
      the "exceptional circumstances" criterion, because it would add
      little to the broad welfare criterion and "leave too much to
      subjective interpretation" (para 15.11). Instead, it proposed a
      criterion of actual or likely harm (paras 15.12 to 15.25). Much of
      the discussion focussed on the definition of harm – the Review
      contemplated a substantial deficit in the standard of health,
      development or well-being which could reasonably be expected of the
      particular child, whereas the Act speaks of "significant" harm. The
      Review did not discuss the meaning of "likely" or how such a
      likelihood is to be predicted. It is clear, however, that the
      threshold was designed to be more precise than the previous wardship
      criterion and to focus upon what was seen as the key objective
      justification for state interference – that the child was suffering
      or likely to suffer harm.

  47. The threshold comes in two limbs and each has two distinct
      components. In the first limb, the court must be satisfied (a) that
      the child is suffering significant harm, and (b) that that harm is
      attributable to the care given to him not being what it would be
      reasonable to expect a parent to give him. In the second limb, the
      court must be satisfied (a) that the child is likely to suffer
      significant harm, and (b) that that likelihood is attributable to the
      care likely to be given to him if the order is not made not being
      what it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to him. It
      would, as Lord Nicholls pointed out in In re H [1996] AC 563, 591, be
      odd if the first limb had to be proved to the satisfaction of the
      court but the basis for prediction in the second limb did not.

  48. Since In re H, a clear distinction has been drawn between the degree
      of likelihood required by the second limb and the basis upon which
      the court can be satisfied of that likelihood. It was held in In re H 
      that "likely" did not mean "more likely than not", but a "real
      possibility", the degree of possibility required depending upon the
      seriousness of the harm which was feared. The House might have held
      that "likely" meant "probable", but it adopted a more flexible test.
      It is worth noting that Lord Nicholls did not think that adopting
      this more flexible test would significantly prejudice the parents'
      interests: "so far as the parents are concerned, there is no
      particular magic in a threshold test based on a probability of
      significant harm as distinct from a real possibility" (p 585D).

  49. Having adopted a flexible test of likelihood, it became all the more
      important to hold that an objective factual basis was required from
      which to draw the inference that future harm was likely. This was
      controversial in In re H [1996] but has been firmly established ever
      since and for very good reasons. Care courts are often told that the
      best predictor of the future is the past. But prediction is only
      possible where the past facts are proved. A real possibility that
      something has happened in the past is not enough to predict that it
      will happen in the future. It may be the fact that a judge has found
      that there is a real possibility that something has happened. But
      that is not sufficient for this purpose. A finding of a real
      possibility that a child has suffered harm does not establish that he
      has. A finding of a real possibility that the harm which a child has
      suffered is "non-accidental" does not establish that it was. A
      finding of a real possibility that this parent harmed a child does
      not establish that she did. Only a finding that he has, it was, or
      she did, as the case may be, can be sufficient to found a prediction
      that because it has happened in the past the same is likely to happen
      in the future. Care courts need to hear this message loud and clear.

  50. In In re S-B [2010] 1 AC 678, the "real possibility" that the mother
      had harmed J was the only basis upon which the judge concluded that
      it was likely that W would suffer harm in the future. There was
      nothing else. J had suffered bruises and all bruising to a tiny baby
      must be taken seriously. But they had probably been caused on one
      occasion by one parent. It could not be suggested that the other
      parent had failed to protect him. What was impermissible, as stated
      in para 49, was to make this, and this alone, the basis for
      predicting that the mother was likely to harm W in the future. It may
      well be that when the case was re-heard, facts emerged from which it
      was possible to make such a prediction.

  51. Cases such as In re S-B are vanishingly rare. As McFarlane LJ pointed
      out in the Court of Appeal [2012] 3 WLR 952, para 109, the 
      Lancashire case [2000] 2 AC 147, in respect of the child-minder, was
      "truly a one-point case. There were no other adverse findings made
      against the childminder" (he says "other" but he must mean no adverse
      findings) (para 108). Likewise, In re S-B "was [a case] of a one-off
      ('whodunit') injury, there was no question of failure to protect and
      no finding of collusion" (para 111). Even in In re F [2011] 2 FLR 856
      , there were no adverse findings against the father (para 112). Most
      care cases are not "one-off whodunit" cases. They come with a
      multitude of facts.

  52. It is, of course, a fact that a previous child has been injured or
      even killed while in the same household as this parent. No-one has
      ever suggested that that fact should be ignored. Such a fact normally
      comes associated with innumerable other facts which may be relevant
      to the prediction of future harm to another child. How many injuries
      were there? When and how were they caused? On how many occasions were
      they inflicted? How obvious will they have been? Was the child in
      pain or unable to use his limbs? Would any ordinary parent have
      noticed this? Was there a delay in seeking medical attention? Was
      there concealment from or active deception of the authorities? What
      do those facts tell us about the child care capacities of the parent
      with whom we are concerned?

  53. Then, of course, those facts must be set alongside other facts. What
      were the household circumstances at the time? Did drink and/or drugs
      feature? Was there violence between the adults? How have things
      changed since? Has this parent left the old relationship? Has she
      entered a new one? Is it different? What does this combination of
      facts tell us about the likelihood of harm to any of the individual
      children with whom the court is now concerned? Does what happened
      several years ago to a tiny baby in very different circumstances
      enable us to predict the likelihood of significant harm to much older
      children in a completely new household?

  54. Hence I agree entirely with McFarlane LJ when he said that In re S-B 
      is not authority for the proposition that "if you cannot identify the
      past perpetrator, you cannot establish future likelihood" (para 111).
      There may, or may not, be a multitude of established facts from which
      such a likelihood can be established. There is no substitute for a
      careful, individualised assessment of where those facts take one. But 
      In re S-B is authority for the proposition that a real possibility
      that this parent has harmed a child in the past is not, by itself,
      sufficient to establish the likelihood that she will cause harm to
      another child in the future.

          Disposal

  55. It follows that I would dismiss the local authority's appeal on the
      single issue which has been identified for the decision of this court
      and the courts below. But what should be the consequence of that?

  56. As McFarlane LJ pointed out, there were several facts found by Judge
      Masterman which might have been relevant to an assessment of whether
      it was likely that this mother would harm children in the future.
      There was "(a) gross and substantial collusion expressly designed to
      prevent the court identifying the perpetrator; (b) failure to protect
      T-L; (c) deliberately keeping T-L away from health professionals in
      order to avoid the detection of injury" (para 109). The local
      authority have chosen not to rely upon these. They acquiesced in the
      decision to treat this as a one point case. The result was that this
      mother returned to the household where she had previously been
      looking after the three subject children for some time without (as
      far as we know) giving any cause for concern. She has now been
      looking after her new baby for more than a year, also without (as far
      as we know) giving any cause for concern.

  57. In those circumstances it would be most unfair to the whole family,
      not only to this mother, but also to her husband and all the
      children, for these proceedings to continue further. If the local
      authority wish to make a case that any of these children is likely to
      suffer significant harm in the future, they will have to bring new
      proceedings. The current application must remain dismissed.

          LORD WILSON

  58. I agree that the appeal should be dismissed. I will set out the
      reasons for my agreement in all save the final three of the following
      paragraphs of this judgment. Then I will identify an issue between
      myself and most other members of the court which, although important,
      does not affect the disposal of the appeal.

  59. Where a child has suffered significant harm but the court is unable
      to identify its perpetrator or perpetrators, it will consign all
      those whose perpetration of it remains a real possibility to a pool
      of possible perpetrators. One of the most vexed issues in the public
      law relating to children surrounds the legal consequences of the
      consignment of a person, let us say X, to a pool of possible
      perpetrators. To be specific: at what stage or stages, and in what
      way, does a court appraise the risk posed to a child by X when his or
      her perpetration of significant harm to that child or to another
      child has been adjudged to be a real possibility yet no more than a
      real possibility?

  60. It is agreed that, when the threshold to the making of a care or
      supervision order set by section 31(2) of the Children Act 1989 ("the
      Act") has been crossed and the court proceeds to consider, under
      section 1(1) of the Act, whether it would serve the welfare of the
      child to make such an order, the consignment of a proposed carer to a
      pool of possible perpetrators of harm to that child or to another
      child must, with whatever degree of difficulty, be weighed in the
      balance: for it is relevant to the harm which the child is at risk of
      suffering (section 1(3)(e)) and to the capacity of X to meet his or
      her needs (section 1(3)(f)). So the court will, in particular:

                  (a) study the circumstances in which X's possible
                  perpetration of that harm took place;

                  (b) compare them with the circumstances in which, if
                  permitted, X would provide care for the subject child;

                  (c) weigh the significance of any changes in X and in the
                  circumstances surrounding him or her since the time when
                  he or she may have perpetrated the harm;

                  (d) have regard to the age and other characteristics of
                  the subject child; and

                  (e) assess the adequacy of the protective measures which
                  are in place, or could be put in place, by way of
                  mitigation of such risk as X may pose to the subject
                  child.

  61. It seems that occasionally, probably in order to aid the difficult
      task which in the future he or another judge may face of weighing, at
      the welfare stage, the significance of his consignment of X, along
      with another person (let us say Y), to a pool of possible
      perpetrators, a judge has proceeded to suggest that the real
      possibility that Y perpetrated the injuries is stronger than the real
      possibility that X did so. In a case in the Court of Appeal, namely 
      In re T (Care Proceedings: Appeal) [2009] EWCA Civ 1208, [2010] 1 FLR
      1325, I suggested, at para 62, that a judge who had made such a
      suggestion might have been trying to dance on the head of a pin.
      Three weeks later, in In re S-B (Children) (Care Proceedings:
      Standard of Proof) [2009] UKSC 17, [2010] 1 AC 678, para 44, the
      Supreme Court advised judges to be cautious about making such a
      suggestion. In my view judges would at least have to ask themselves
      (for, if they did not do so, an appellate court, as in In re T, might
      be invited to ask itself) whether their reasons for considering that
      the real possibility of perpetration was stronger in relation to Y
      than in relation to X were not, instead, reasons for concluding that
      the former had probably perpetrated the injuries and that therefore
      there should be no pool at all.

  62. But is the consignment of a person to a pool of possible perpetrators
      also relevant to the issue whether the threshold set by section 31(2)
      of the Act is crossed?

  63. The threshold has two parts: (a) that the child is suffering, or is
      likely to suffer, significant harm; and (b) that the harm or
      likelihood of harm is attributable either to the care given, or
      likely to be given, to him not being what it would be reasonable to
      expect a parent to give to him or to his being beyond parental
      control.

  64. The phrase "not being what it would be reasonable to expect a parent
      to give" in section 31(2)(b) covers every case in which a court
      concludes that the care provided by one or other of the parents or by
      anyone else who shared the child's care fell short of a reasonable
      standard, even if, provided that he must have been within those
      categories, the person whose care thus fell short cannot be
      identified: Lancashire County Council v B [2000] 2 AC 147. It is
      therefore only in few cases that subsection 2 (b), known as the
      attributability condition, presents any significant extra hurdle to
      the crossing of the threshold.

  65. We may thus put the attributability condition to one side and ask,
      more narrowly, whether the consignment of a person to a pool of
      possible perpetrators is also relevant to whether the child is
      suffering, or is likely to suffer, significant harm. Indeed we may
      further narrow the question by also putting to one side the child who
      is suffering significant harm. For in such a case, and subject to the
      attributability condition, the threshold is crossed irrespective of
      whether the perpetrator of the harm to the child can be identified.

  66. So this appeal surrounds the unharmed child, whom a local authority
      alleges to be likely to suffer significant harm at the hands of a
      person because she (or he) has been consigned to a pool of possible
      perpetrators of harm to another child.

  67. The Court of Appeal directed substantial criticism at the appellant
      local authority, Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council, for having
      presented this application for care orders to the judge on the basis
      that the only fact upon which it relied for the crossing of the
      threshold was that the first respondent, JJ, had been consigned to a
      pool of possible perpetrators of injuries to her deceased child, T-L.
      In making this confined presentation Stockton took a deliberate
      decision not to rely on the findings of Judge Masterman that, had she
      not been the perpetrator of the injuries, JJ had failed to protect
      T-L, had kept her away from health professionals in order to avoid
      detection of her injuries and had colluded with T-L's father in
      attempting to prevent the court from identifying their perpetrator.

  68. The most powerful of the criticisms made in the Court of Appeal
      emanated from Lord Judge CJ. He suggested that if, on Stockton's
      confined presentation, the ultimate verdict of the courts was to be
      that the threshold had not been crossed but if, on a wider
      presentation, the threshold would have been crossed and the court
      would have proceeded to make care orders, Stockton's decision might
      turn out irresponsibly to have left the children at risk.

  69. The Lord Chief Justice made a powerful point. It is no more than
      partly undermined by a provisional conclusion, derived from the
      limited material before the court, that it seems improbable that the
      welfare of the children would be served by their being taken into
      care or even by obliging JJ's husband, namely DJ, to separate from
      her as a condition of the court's declining to remove some or all of
      them from his care. Nevertheless I decline to join in the
      condemnation of Stockton. The relevance or otherwise to the threshold
      of a carer's presence in a pool of perpetrators is a question which
      has rightly concerned local authorities and other child care
      professionals for years: see In re F (Interim Care Order) [2011] EWCA
      Civ 258, [2011] 2 FLR 856, para 15. Local authorities need to
      understand the parameters of their ability to obtain care and
      supervision orders. The only decision of the Supreme Court directly
      to have addressed the question, namely In re S-B (Children) (Care
      Proceedings: Standard of Proof), cited above, was primarily reached
      on another basis, which related to the standard of proof. The present
      appeal at last confers upon this court the opportunity, indeed
      imposes upon it the obligation, to decide the question, in effect
      once and for all. For Stockton's severe pruning of its case has
      ensured that the decision cannot branch out in another direction.

  70. Nevertheless in my view leading counsel for JJ and DJ are right to
      submit that it is a "vanishing rarity" for a past finding of a
      person's (say a mother's) possible perpetration of injuries to a
      child not to be accompanied by findings that, in any event, she had
      culpably ill-treated or neglected the child. The most usual such
      findings, which, as I have indicated, were all made by Judge
      Masterman in relation to JJ, are that, even assuming in her favour
      that she was not the perpetrator of the injuries, she had culpably
      failed to protect the child from them, had failed to seek medical
      attention for them and, by lying, had sought to disable the court
      from identifying her then partner as their perpetrator. Findings of
      such a character can be profoundly serious because they appear to
      betoken a mother's willingness to sacrifice the elementary interests
      of a child to be safe and free from injury on the altar of some adult
      relationship. On reflection, I am not at all sure that such findings
      become irrelevant just because the mother is now living, as JJ is now
      living, with another partner who does not represent a risk to a
      subject child and from whom there is therefore no specific need for
      the child to be protected: for no doubt the child will continue to
      need protection from a variety of situations and from persons other
      than the new partner. More widely, such findings raise grave concerns
      about that mother's entire capacity for responsible care; and, if
      marshalled by a local authority as the factual foundation for the
      crossing of the threshold, they would need most carefully to be
      weighed against such evidence as indicated an improvement in her
      capacity for responsible care as at the relevant date.

  71. Stockton does not dispute that a prediction of likelihood of
      significant harm must be founded on proven facts. There is, of
      course, no express statement of such a requirement in the Act itself.
      It arises as a result of judicial interpretation at the highest
      level, namely in In re H (Minors) (Sexual Abuse: Standard of Proof)) 
      [1996] AC 563; and the interpretation has been specifically
      reaffirmed in In re B (Children) (Care Proceedings: Standard of Proof
      ) (CAFCASS intervening) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] AC 11. I respectfully
      disagree with the view, which Lord Reed at para 93 describes as
      attractive, that the interpretation is over-complicated. At all
      events Stockton argues, instead, that a person's consignment to a
      pool of possible perpetrators of harm to a child is itself a finding
      of fact which can found a prediction that a second child is likely to
      suffer significant harm; or, even if not, that, when added to a
      finding (being on any view a finding of fact) that the first child
      did suffer harm, it provides the requisite foundation upon which it
      would be open to the court to predict the likelihood.

  72. Is a bald statement that there is a real possibility that X caused
      the injuries a statement of fact? I personally do not find the answer
      easy. But there is no need for an answer. For the consignment of two
      (or more) persons to a pool of possible perpetrators goes further
      than that: it is a statement not only that there is a real
      possibility that X caused the injuries and alternatively that Y
      caused them but also that no one else caused them, i.e that one or
      other of them did cause them. I am clear that such a conclusion does
      amount to a finding of fact. But is it a fact relevant to the
      threshold? Where X and Y remain together as a unit and are putting
      themselves forward as carers for an unharmed child, it is certainly
      relevant and might well suffice in enabling the threshold to be
      crossed in relation to that child; for in those circumstances the
      fact is that somebody in the child's proposed home did perpetrate
      injuries to another child. But the difficulty arises in the case,
      reflective of the facts in this appeal, in which X and Y no longer
      remain together as a unit and in which only one of them, X, is put
      forward as a carer. The consignment of X to a pool is not a finding
      that X did cause the injuries. So the question arises whether in that
      situation such a finding of fact is relevant.

  73. Here is the crux of this appeal. Stockton's case is deeply illogical.

  74. Stockton argues that the children are at risk of suffering
      significant harm because of the presence in their home of JJ. So the
      requisite foundational facts must relate to JJ. To point to no more
      than the fact that T-L suffered grave non-accidental injuries is, on
      any view, insufficient. A second fact is needed such as relates to
      JJ. Stockton seeks to make the link with her by relying on her
      consignment to the pool of possible perpetrators of the injuries. But
      her consignment to the pool is not a relevant fact because it falls
      short of ascribing their perpetration to her. The result is that
      there is no relevant second fact. In both In re H and In re B, cited
      above, it was clear that, if in each case the girl had suffered harm,
      it had been at the hands of her step-father; in the event, however,
      the court's conclusion was no more than that there was a real
      possibility that she had suffered the harm. Stockton does not
      challenge the principle established by those cases that such a
      conclusion was insufficient to found a likelihood that the
      step-father would cause significant harm to other children. The
      present appeal presents the precisely obverse situation; there was no
      doubt that T-L had suffered harm and the only issue, which in the
      event was unable to be resolved save in terms of a real possibility,
      related to the identity of the perpetrator. There is in my view no
      basis for departing from that principle in this precisely obverse,
      yet analogous, situation. The harm and the person's responsibility
      for it are the two planks on which any conclusion about likelihood
      must rest and they must be equally sturdy.

  75. If and insofar (so Stockton proceeds to submit) as the basis of the
      appeal is illogical, then so be it; for otherwise legalism would
      triumph over child protection. But - in my view - logic is the blood
      which runs through the veins of the law: allow it to escape and
      ultimately the edifice collapses. Nor is the rigid approach to the
      factual foundation properly categorised as legalism. In In re H,
      cited above, Lord Nicholls commented, at p 592, on the unanimous
      conclusion of the House that, when it turned from looking at the past
      to look at the future, a likelihood of significant harm meant only a
      real possibility of it. "Therein", said Lord Nicholls, "lies the
      protection for children." He continued:

              "But, as I read the Act, Parliament also decided that proof
              of the relevant facts is needed if this threshold is to be
              surmounted. Before the section 1 welfare test and the welfare
              'checklist' can be applied, the threshold has to be crossed.
              Therein lies the protection for parents. They are not to be
              at risk of having their child taken from them and removed
              into the care of the local authority on the basis only of
              suspicions..."

      My view remains that the need for the local authority to prove the
      facts which give rise to a real possibility of significant harm in
      the future is a bulwark against too ready an interference with family
      life on the part of the state. And, subject to the caveat that the
      court received no argument on the impact of article 8 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights, I incline to the view that nothing less
      than a factual foundation would justify such grave interference with
      the rights of the child and the parents thereunder to respect for
      their family life: see Olsson v Sweden (1989) 11 EHRR 259, in which,
      at paras 67 and 68 (which it has cited with approval on many
      subsequent occasions), the European Court of Human Rights stressed
      that a child's removal into care was justified only if it was
      necessary in a democratic society in the sense that it corresponded
      to a pressing social need and was based on reasons which were
      relevant and sufficient.

  76. In a final argument which found some favour with McFarlane LJ in the
      Court of Appeal, but which, with respect, I find puzzling, Stockton
      urges that the interpretation of the alternative limb of section
      31(2)(a) of the Act should be no less flexible than the modern
      approach of the criminal law reflected in section 5 of the Domestic
      Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004, as amended. Its general effect
      is that, where a child has died or been seriously harmed as a result
      of an unlawful act, a member of his household is guilty of an offence
      even if the jury can conclude no more than that either he perpetrated
      the act or he was or ought to have been aware that the child was at
      significant risk of harm and failed to take reasonable steps to
      protect him from it. In my view, however, there is no disparity of
      principle in this respect between the criminal law and the proper
      approach to the likelihood of significant harm in the subsection. In
      paras 103 to 109 of his judgment McFarlane LJ reverted to the
      findings of Judge Masterman that, if she did not perpetrate the
      injuries to T-L, JJ was at any rate culpable in the respects
      summarised at para 67 above; and the Lord Justice suggested that the
      effect of the dismissal of the appeal would be that such findings of
      culpability "must be ignored" in evaluating the likelihood of
      significant harm to another child. But they are to be ignored only
      because, in setting up the present proceedings as a test case,
      Stockton has invited the court to ignore them.

  77. I therefore conclude that the mother's consignment to the pool of
      possible perpetrators of the injuries to T-L is irrelevant to whether
      the three subject children are likely to suffer significant harm.

  78. The issue between myself and most other members of this court arises
      out of the following observations:

              (a) those of Lady Hale, at paras 50 and 54, that what had
              been impermissible in the In re S-B case [2010] 1 AC 678 was
              for the court to have made the mother's consignment to the
              pool "alone" or "by itself" the basis for predicting the
              likelihood;

              (b) that of Lord Hope, at para 87, that a person's
              consignment to a pool may "in combination with other facts
              and circumstances" help to show that the threshold has been
              crossed; and

              (c) those of Lord Reed, at paras 95, 96 and 98, that a
              person's consignment to a pool cannot "solely" or "by itself"
              form the basis of a prediction of likelihood and that "some
              other cause for concern, besides [the consignment], must be
              established".

  79. First, I hasten to make clear that I respectfully agree with a
      different point made by Lord Hope at para 87, namely that, in
      addressing the likelihood that an uninjured child will suffer
      significant harm, the court can treat X's consignment to a pool of
      possible perpetrators of injury to a second child as information
      which invites further inquiry. It would therefore go too far to say
      that, at the threshold inquiry, the consignment should be ignored. It
      might enable the court to find relevant facts established. There
      might, for example, be a disputed allegation that X had perpetrated
      the injuries which a third child had suffered; and the real
      possibility that X had perpetrated the injuries to the second child
      might, when added to the other evidence, lead the court to find the
      allegation established. X's perpetration of the injuries to the third
      child would then be a relevant fact. By no alchemy, however, could
      X's possible perpetration of the injuries to the second child then
      become a relevant fact.

  80. My disagreement with most of my colleagues relates to their
      suggestion, made most explicitly by Lord Hope, that although X's
      consignment to a pool cannot alone constitute a factual foundation
      for a prediction of likely significant harm, it can, if weighed
      together with other facts which are on any view relevant, figure as
      part of the requisite factual foundation. I feel driven to the
      conclusion that their suggestion is illogical; and that if, for the
      purpose of the requisite foundation, X's consignment to a pool has a
      value of zero on its own, it can, for this purpose, have no greater
      value in company. I can only hope that their suggestion, highly
      authoritative though it will be, will not destabilise the requisite
      foundation; will not in practice lead to a prediction about a real
      possibility in the future being founded, in part, on no more than a
      real possibility about what happened in the past; and will not, by
      the back door, lead to the ascendancy over the majority view in In re
      H (Minors) [1996] AC 563 of the minority view which, so Lord Reed
      (with whom Lord Clarke and Lord Carnwath agree) indicates, would in
      principle have held some attraction for him.

          LORD HOPE

  81. It is not the function of the court to give rulings on points of law
      arising from a hypothetical state of facts. But I do not see this
      appeal, or the approach that has been taken by the local authority in
      pruning the case as it has done in order to present us with a single
      issue on which authoritative guidance is said to be needed, as open
      to that criticism. From time to time cases of the kind that require
      that sort of treatment do come up, and it is in the public interest
      that the court should respond to them in as helpful a way as
      possible. That is especially so where the problem to which its
      attention has been drawn is said to be due to a difficulty in
      applying the way judges have interpreted the provisions of a statute
      to a given set of facts, which need to be isolated from their usual
      surroundings in order to obtain a definitive ruling on the point.

  82. The court will, of course, need to be satisfied that the issue which
      has been raised is one which does genuinely require attention, and is
      not itself an artificial one. It is, no doubt, highly unusual for
      cases under section 31(2) of the Children Act 1989 to be decided on
      such a narrow basis. The question whether the threshold has been
      crossed must almost always be decided on a consideration of all the
      facts. Had it not been for the need for guidance on the point that
      has been raised, that would certainly have been the proper way to
      approach this case. But I am entirely satisfied that the issue that
      has been presented to us in this appeal is one of general public
      importance and that we should deal with it.

  83. I also think that such facts as we have at our disposal suggest that
      it would be wrong to criticise the local authority for having acted
      irresponsibly. JJ's relationship with SW, with whom she was living at
      the time of T-L's death, ended more than five years ago. Since then
      she has formed a new relationship with DJ, to whom she is now
      married, and she has been looking after the three children who are
      the subject of these proceedings for about four years and her new
      baby for more than a year. So far as we know, there has been no cause
      for concern. It would be open to the local authority to take the
      appropriate action at any time if there were grounds for thinking
      that the children were suffering or were likely to suffer significant
      harm. I am prepared to assume in the local authority's favour that it
      would not have approached this case in the way it has done if there
      were reasons for thinking that it was putting the children at risk of
      suffering significant harm by doing so.

  84. Turning to the issue that has been presented to us, the golden rule
      must surely be that a prediction of future harm has to be based on
      facts that have been proved on a balance of probabilities. I would
      respectfully endorse Lord Wilson's observation in para 75, repeating
      what he said in In re F (Interim Care Order) [2011] EWCA Civ 258, 
      [2011] 2 FLR 856 that this is a bulwark against too ready an
      interference with family life on the part of the state. One has only
      to reflect for a moment on the tragic consequences of some of the
      notorious cases of two decades ago to appreciate the wisdom of this
      remark. They were referred to by the First Division of the Court of
      Session in L, Petitioners (No 1) 1993 SLT 1310, 1313: see also 
      Rochdale Borough Council v A [1991] 2 FLR 192; Sloan v B 1991 SC 412 
      (the Orkney case). L was a case where eight children from three
      separate families in Ayrshire were made the subject of place of
      safety orders under Part III of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968
      on inadequate evidence. It was several years before those orders
      could be set aside, and it took many months of careful and skilled
      work after that to bring the families who had been split up in
      traumatic circumstances together again.

  85. These were extreme examples. Many other cases of unjustified removal
      may be expected to occur if the golden rule is not adhered to.
      Unjustified removal can itself result in significant harm to the
      children – the very thing that section 31 was designed to prevent. It
      is not just the immediate distress of separation. Long-term
      relationships between parents and their children can be damaged too,
      as the court found in the Ayrshire case in the series of unreported
      hearings that it took to restore the situation as closely as possible
      to what it had been before the removal took place.

  86. To identify what is and is not a "finding of fact" for the purposes
      of the threshold, which looks to the future, is only the first step
      in the analysis. Views may differ as to what is truly a "fact" for
      this purpose, but I do not think that one need dwell on this
      question. Anything that is proved on a balance of probabilities may
      be taken into account to see what can be made of it. The crucial
      steps are to identify what is relevant and what is not, and then to
      determine whether what is found to be relevant is sufficient for a
      finding that the threshold has been crossed. If it is not, the
      question will be whether there are other facts and circumstances that
      can be brought into account to satisfy this requirement.

  87. Let us assume that the question is whether the child would be at risk
      while in the care of X. A finding that X is in the pool of two or
      more possible perpetrators of harm that a child sustained in the past
      is a finding of fact. It means that, because X is in the pool, it is
      possible that X was the perpetrator. If the perpetrators are still
      together, it will be relevant, and may on its own be sufficient, to
      show that the threshold has been crossed. If the parties have
      separated and X is the carer, I decline to say that a finding that X
      was in the pool will no longer be relevant. That is so for two
      reasons: first, because it is information which invites further
      inquiry as to whether the subsequent child is likely to suffer harm
      while in the care of X; and, second, because, in combination with
      other facts and circumstances that the inquiry reveals about X's
      attitude or behaviour, it may help to show that this threshold has
      been crossed. It may have a bearing on the weight of the evidence
      when looked at as a whole, including an assessment of the balance of
      probabilities.

  88. Each case will turn on its own facts, and the context in which the
      finding is being examined will vary from case to case. It is not
      possible, dealing with an issue about the risk of future harm in the
      abstract as we are here, to be more precise than that. So I do not,
      with respect, agree with Lord Wilson that the finding can never be
      relevant. But it will not on its own be sufficient. The crucial point
      is this: it cannot, and must not, be treated on its own as a finding
      of fact that it was X who caused or contributed to the injuries.

  89. The question which has been put to us, as set out in the Statement of
      Facts and Issues, is whether (i) a finding that a child has suffered
      harm while in the care of more than one person and (ii) a finding
      that one or both of the carers have perpetrated that harm are
      findings of fact which may be relied on in subsequent proceedings
      relating to only one of the potential perpetrators, in support of a
      conclusion that a subsequent child is likely to suffer significant
      harm in a new family unit of which that potential perpetrator is
      part.

  90. The answer which I would give, applying the test set out in para 49
      of In re S-B (Children) (Care Proceedings: Standard of Proof) [2010]
      AC 678, is that these findings may be relied on only to the extent
      that they may be relevant to the issue the court has to decide. But
      to find that this information is relevant does not go far enough.
      This is because such findings would not be sufficient, on their own,
      to establish that a child in the new family unit was likely to suffer
      significant harm. If they are the only findings that are available,
      they must be disregarded in the assessment for lack of sufficiency. A
      prediction of future harm based on what has happened in the past will
      only be justified if one can link what has happened in the past
      directly and unequivocally with the person in the new family unit in
      whose care the subsequent child is living or will now live.

  91. For these reasons, and for those given by Lady Hale, Lord Wilson
      (except in his final three paragraphs) and Lord Reed I too would
      dismiss the appeal.

          LORD SUMPTION

  92. I share the misgivings of Lord Wilson about the suggestion that
      something which has not been proved to the requisite standard and
      therefore has no weight of its own at the threshold stage, can
      nevertheless add to the weight of something else that has been
      proved. I therefore agree with the observations at paragraphs 78-80
      of his judgment. With that reservation, I agree with the judgment of
      Lady Hale and would, like the rest of the court, dismiss the appeal.

          LORD REED (with whom Lord Clarke and Lord Carnwath agree)

  93. I see the attraction of the view that the approach to the
      interpretation of section 31(2)(a) of the Children Act 1989 adopted
      by the majority in In re H (Minors) (Sexual Abuse: Standard of Proof) 
      [1996] AC 563 was over-complicated and has had unfortunate
      consequences. As Lord Lloyd of Berwick said, at p 581:

              "Parliament has asked a simple question: Is the court
              satisfied that there is a serious risk of significant harm in
              the future? The question should be capable of being answered
              without too much over-analysis."

      The number of subsequent appeals concerned with the interpretation of
      section 31(2)(a) suggests that the approach adopted in that case may
      have raised problems of interpretation or application calling for
      repeated clarification. This is unfortunate, especially in an area of
      the law which has to be applied on a daily basis by courts at all
      levels, and in which clarity is therefore of particular importance.
      Nevertheless, it is too late to reconsider the decision in In re H. 
      The view of the majority has been followed in two later decisions at
      the highest level, as Lady Hale has explained, and it must in my view
      be treated as settled law.

  94. The case of In re H was itself concerned with the question whether,
      where a child alleged that she had been sexually abused and that
      allegation was the sole cause for concern, the allegation had to be
      proved before the court could intervene. As Lord Nicholls of
      Birkenhead explained at p 591, the conclusion that it did was
      consistent with the terms of section 31(2)(a), which permit
      intervention where "the child concerned is suffering, or is likely to
      suffer, significant harm". Why, it was asked, would Parliament have
      provided the former of those alternatives, if the likelihood of harm
      (construed as meaning a real possibility) would be sufficient in a
      case where previous harm was alleged but not proved?

  95. As Lady Hale has explained at paras 48-50 of her judgment, if In re H 
      established that a real possibility of past harm was an impermissible
      basis for inferring a real possibility of future harm, the decisions
      of the Court of Appeal in Lancashire County Council v B [2000] 2 AC
      147, and of this court in In re S-B (Children) (Care Proceedings:
      Standard of Proof) [2009] UKSC 17; [2010] 1 AC 678, established that
      a real possibility that X was the perpetrator of past harm was an
      insufficient basis for inferring a real possibility that X might
      perpetrate future harm. This conclusion does not cause any difficulty
      in circumstances where all the possible perpetrators of the past harm
      are also responsible for the future care of the child in question:
      where for example a child is living with X and Y, proof that either X
      or Y previously harmed another child may provide a basis for
      inferring that either X or Y might harm the child in question, and
      that there is therefore a real possibility of that child's being
      harmed. The court cannot on the other hand draw such an inference,
      following Lancashire County Council and In re S-B, where it is proved
      that either X or Y harmed another child but it is only X who is now
      responsible for the care of the child in question. In other words,
      where the person who harmed a child cannot be identified, the
      threshold cannot be met in relation to another child solely on the
      basis that a possible perpetrator of the harm is involved in the care
      of that child unless all possible perpetrators are so involved.

  96. In substance, as it appears to me, the court is saying that, as a
      matter of law, a real possibility that X harmed another child in the
      past is not by itself a basis upon which the court can properly be
      satisfied that there is a likelihood that X will harm the child in
      question in the future. A basis for such a rule can be found,
      ultimately, in the language of section 31(2)(a): as Lady Hale has
      explained, the decision in In re H reflected the terms of that
      provision, and that decision, together with the subsequent decisions
      of the House of Lords and the Supreme Court, including the decision
      in In re S-B, form a coherent body of law. Support for such a rule
      can also be found in the contrast between section 31(2)(a) and
      section 43(1)(a), which applies where the court is satisfied that the
      applicant "has reasonable cause to suspect that the child is
      suffering, or is likely to suffer, significant harm". The approach
      adopted in In re S-B also derives support from the legislative
      history of section 31(2), as Lady Hale has explained.

  97. I am, with respect, less convinced, at least in the absence of any
      argument on the point, by Lord Wilson's suggestion that it is an
      approach which the court is compelled to adopt in order to comply
      with article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human
      Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Article 8 is undoubtedly relevant to
      the circumstances in which a care order should be made, but there
      seems to me to be room for argument as to whether it is engaged by a
      provision which merely confers upon the court the jurisdiction
      enabling it to make such an order. As Lord Clyde explained in the 
      Lancashire County Council case [2000] 2 AC 147, 170, section 31(2)
      merely opens the way to the possibility that an order may be made. A
      care order will only be granted by the court after careful
      consideration of the case in accordance with section 1, including
      consideration of the matters specified in section 1(3) and the
      requirement in section 1(5) that an order is only to be made if the
      making of it would be better for the child than the making of no
      order at all. The need for caution and restraint in the making of an
      order is further underlined by the requirement that any order be
      proportionate in order to comply with article 8 of the Convention.

  98. Finally, I would observe that if, as has been said, the current law
      is causing consternation, that appears to me to be an over-reaction.
      It is important to emphasise, as Lady Hale has done at paras 52-54,
      that the court's inability to establish whether X was the perpetrator
      of harm to a child in the past does not necessarily mean that the
      threshold set by section 31(2)(a) cannot be met in relation to a
      child now being cared for by X. It means however that some other
      cause for concern, besides the possibility that X was the perpetrator
      of the harm, must be established. The onus thereby imposed is, in a
      case of that kind, one which should ordinarily be capable of being
      discharged where substantial causes for concern currently exist. In
      practice, in the great majority of cases where a child has been
      harmed by one of its primary carers but it has not been possible to
      identify which of them was responsible, and only one of them is now
      responsible for the care of another child, it will be possible to
      establish facts on the basis of which a prognosis as to the future
      risk of harm can be made. The case at hand would itself appear to
      have been such a case, if the evidence before the court had not been
      deliberately restricted.

  99. For these reasons, and those given by Lord Hope and Lady Hale, I
      agree that the appeal should be dismissed.