          Summary


          Hilary Term
          [2013] UKSC 4
          On appeal from: [2011] EWCA Civ 828


          JUDGMENT

              B (Algeria) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the
              Home Department (Respondent)

          before

          Lord Neuberger, President
          Lady Hale
          Lord Kerr
          Lord Sumption
          Lord Carnwath

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          30 January 2013

          Heard on 5 December 2012

      Appellant
      Hugh Southey QC
      Kate Markus
      (Instructed by Birnberg Peirce and Partners) 	  	Respondent
      Robin Tam QC
      Steven Gray
      (Instructed by Treasury Solicitor)

          LORD KERR (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lady Hale, Lord Sumption and
          Lord Carnwath agree)

   1. An Algerian national whose true identity has not been revealed, but
      who has been referred to throughout these proceedings as 'B', was
      sentenced to four months' imprisonment by the Special Immigration
      Appeals Commission (SIAC) on 26 November 2010. That sentence was
      imposed because of what was found to be B's deliberate and
      contumelious refusal to obey an order made by SIAC on 19 July 2007.
      By that order, SIAC had required B to give particulars of his true
      identity and to consent to provide a sample for the purpose of DNA
      testing. B had supplied the sample but had steadfastly refused to
      disclose his identity or the other particulars.

   2. B appealed SIAC's order committing him for contempt. Before the Court
      of Appeal [2011] EWCA Civ 828 the principal arguments advanced on his
      behalf were that the sentence of imprisonment gave rise to breaches
      of his rights under articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention for
      the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).
      Secondary submissions were made that SIAC had failed to give reasons
      for a critical finding that B was likely to continue to take
      medication while in prison and that the sentence was excessive. The
      significance of the point about medication was that it underlay
      SIAC's conclusion that B was unlikely to suffer a relapse into
      paranoid psychosis if he was committed to prison. He had suffered
      from that condition previously and there was medical evidence that,
      if sent to prison, he was likely to react by refusing to take
      prescribed medication and that, in consequence, he would revert to a
      psychotic state.

   3. The Court of Appeal found that SIAC had erred in expressing
      confidence that B would not relapse into paranoid psychosis if he was
      sent to prison. In particular, it had erred in rejecting, in effect,
      the evidence of two consultant psychiatrists, Dr Deeley and Dr Payne,
      that B would refuse to take his medication and that, in consequence,
      the onset of a psychotic state was likely. Moreover, SIAC had
      misunderstood the evidence of another doctor, Dr Thompson, that B
      would take medication if detained. Dr Thompson had expressed that
      opinion on the basis that B would be detained in a secure hospital.
      He did not hold that view in relation to B's detention in prison
      which was, of course, the place that he would be detained on foot of
      SIAC's order.

   4. A majority of the Court of Appeal (Longmore LJ and Laws LJ) held
      that, notwithstanding SIAC's error, the appeal against the four
      months' committal order should be dismissed. They rejected the
      arguments based on articles 3 and 8 of ECHR. Longmore LJ accepted
      that there was a risk of relapse if B did not continue to take his
      medication in prison (para 16) and it is implicit in that finding
      that there was also a risk that he would not do so. A relapse into a
      psychotic condition whilst in prison would not amount to a breach of
      article 3, in Longmore LJ's view, because arrangements would be in
      place for B's transfer to hospital if such a relapse occurred.
      (Section 48 of the Mental Health Act 1983, as amended by section 1(4)
      of, and paragraph 11 of Schedule 1 to, the Mental Health Act 2007,
      empowers the Secretary of State, if satisfied that a civil prisoner –
      which would be the appellant's status – was in need of urgent medical
      treatment, to ensure that such treatment was received in hospital.)

   5. On the question whether the four months' imprisonment was excessive,
      the majority found that it was not. Longmore LJ said:

              "Many people might think that a sentence of four months for a
              deliberate and contumelious contempt, frustrating the
              Secretary of State's intention to deport B and causing SIAC
              great difficulty in its final disposition of the appeal
              before it, is a sentence which is comparatively merciful."
              (para 20)

   6. Laws LJ was of like mind. At para 37 he said:

              "… this was a grave and deliberate contempt of court. Even on
              the footing that the appellant is at risk of a relapse into
              paranoid psychosis, I am wholly unpersuaded that there is the
              least possibility of any violation of ECHR article 3 or 8.
              This was a lenient sentence."

   7. Etherton LJ, while agreeing that SIAC had erred in the manner found
      by Longmore LJ, was of the view that the case should be remitted to
      SIAC for reconsideration. He considered that SIAC was in "a far
      better position" (para 33) than was the Court of Appeal to evaluate
      recent medical evidence about B's mental state.

          The appeal to this court

   8. The Court of Appeal refused permission to appeal but certified the
      following questions:

              "(1) whether the Court of Appeal is correct that it should
              adopt the approach of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)
              and only allow an appeal where a sentence is manifestly
              excessive or whether section 13 of the Administration of
              Justice Act 1960 (when read with the Civil Procedure Rules)
              gives it a broader discretion that enables it to remit a case
              where a first instance judgment regarding sentence was flawed
              and/or procedurally unfair?

              (2) whether the Court of Appeal must remit a case where a
              first instance judgment regarding sentence imposed in a
              contempt case was flawed and/or procedurally unfair unless it
              concludes that the court below would have reached the same
              conclusion even if it had not fallen into error"

   9. The focus of the appeal in this court was distinctly different from
      that which had been central to the hearing before the Court of
      Appeal. Before this court it was argued that the Court of Appeal had
      unwarrantably deferred to SIAC's selection of the appropriate
      sentence and had wrongly determined that the sentence of four months
      was proper on the basis that it was not manifestly excessive. Mr
      Southey QC, on behalf of the appellant, took particular issue with
      Longmore LJ's statement in para 12 of his judgment where he said:

              "As in any appeal against a sentence of imprisonment, the
              question for this court is whether the sentence imposed was
              excessive or, indeed, to use the almost invariable language
              of the Criminal Division of this court, 'manifestly
              excessive' since there is, of course, a wide discretion given
              to any sentencing tribunal. "

  10. To adopt the conventional approach taken by the Court of Appeal,
      Criminal Division to appeals against sentence by first instance
      courts was wrong, the appellant argued, for three reasons. First, it
      treated SIAC's decision as having residual validity, despite it
      having been found that the basis on which that decision had been
      reached was flawed. The second reason was related to the first.
      Section 13(1) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 gives an
      automatic and broadly based right of appeal from a decision of a
      court in the exercise of its jurisdiction to punish for contempt of
      court. Section 13(3) gives an unfettered power to the appellate court
      to reverse or vary the order of the lower court. It was therefore
      wrong, the appellant contended, to constrain the exercise of that
      power by reference to the possible propriety of the lower court's
      penalty. It was necessary for the appellate court to take an entirely
      de novo decision on the proper penalty, if any, to impose on the
      defendant in a contempt proceeding. Finally, it was argued that, in
      general, where an appellate court has found that the court exercising
      the power to punish for contempt had done so on an unlawful basis, it
      should remit the matter to the original sentencing court so that the
      defendant's right to have the case properly adjudicated by a first
      instance court and to have an opportunity to appeal from that
      decision was preserved.

          Discussion

  11. Where an appellate court has concluded that the basis on which the
      decision of the lower court to sentence someone for contempt is
      flawed, it does not follow that the sentence chosen by the lower
      court is inevitably wrong. It may be an entirely correct sentence but
      for different reasons from those articulated by the original
      sentencing court. The affirmation of the original sentence does not
      necessarily entail an endorsement of the reasons for which the
      decision to sentence was made. Where it has been determined that the
      basis for the original sentence of imprisonment is wrong, a de novo
      assessment must indeed occur. A fresh look at the circumstances
      material to the question of whether imprisonment is the right
      disposal should take place in light of the correct understanding of
      those circumstances.

  12. It is not essential, however, even as a matter of generality, that
      the fresh look be undertaken by the original sentencing court. If it
      is sufficiently clear to the appellate court that a sentence of
      imprisonment is appropriate in light of its revised view of the
      relevant facts, it is not required as a matter of principle or of
      practice that the matter be remitted to the court which first imposed
      the sentence. As Jackson LJ said in JSC BTA Bank v Solodchenko (No 2) 
      [2012] 1 WLR 350 para 60, where an appellate court is seised of the
      case and in possession of all relevant facts, the proper course is
      for the appellate court to determine what the proper sentence for
      contempt should be on the basis of the true facts. Where, of course,
      a fresh investigation of new facts is required and it is necessary or
      desirable that this be undertaken by a first instance court, remittal
      will be suitable. This is not such a case. The Court of Appeal was
      able to evaluate the medical evidence and reach reliable conclusions
      on its significance. It could decide what the appropriate sentence
      should be and it was right to do so.

  13. In the present case it is quite clear that the Court of Appeal
      undertook a fresh examination of the question whether it was
      appropriate to sentence the appellant to prison for his admitted
      contempt. Two principal reasons that he should not be sent to prison
      were advanced on the hearing of the appeal before this court. The
      first of these does not appear to have featured in the appellant's
      arguments before the Court of Appeal, at least not in the form that
      it was pursued in this court. It was that the committal order would
      have no coercive effect whatever. The second argument was that the
      appellant's incarceration would lead to his relapsing into a
      psychotic state.

  14. A third, supplementary, argument was made that, because of the
      already considerable restrictions on the appellant's liberty,
      committal to prison was inappropriate (on his release from prison in
      2005 he was made subject to a control order and has been, since
      appearing before SIAC, under restrictive bail conditions). There is
      nothing to show that the Court of Appeal was unmindful of the
      significant limitation on the appellant's liberty that the current
      bail conditions require. It is, in any event, at least questionable
      that this could be a factor of any significance in deciding whether
      committal should be ordered. Committal is appropriate where it can
      reasonably be expected that this will induce the contemnor to purge
      his contempt (the coercive effect). It is also appropriate to punish
      contempt of a court's order (the penal element). Frequently both
      elements will underlie a committal order. Where there is reason to
      believe that committal will secure compliance with a court's order,
      the fact that the person subject to it has already substantial
      restrictions on his liberty is immaterial. Where it is required in
      order to properly punish the contemnor, the loss of residual liberty
      is unlikely to weigh heavily against the making of the order.

  15. Contrary to the appellant's argument on the first two grounds, the
      Court of Appeal in effect reached conclusions which were favourable
      to the appellant on both issues and, so far as it was required, their
      conclusions on those issues amounted to a de novo examination of the
      question whether the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment was
      appropriate.

  16. SIAC did not find that the appellant's committal to prison would have
      a coercive effect on him in terms of persuading him to disclose his
      true identity. Rather, it approached the question of possible
      coercive effect by considering whether it had been shown that sending
      him to prison would not in any circumstances induce him to divulge
      the required information. At para 71 of its judgment SIAC said:

              "… the Commission agrees with Mr Tam that the position at the
              present time is not such that it can be said that committal
              of the appellant to prison would be so unlikely to coerce him
              into obeying the Commission's order as to render committal
              (for that reason) disproportionate, either in terms of
              article 8 or otherwise to make it inappropriate to commit the
              appellant to prison."

  17. In the appellant's skeleton argument for the hearing in the Court of
      Appeal, it was suggested that this passage from SIAC's judgment
      "shows that the Commission considered that the prospect of committal
      having a coercive effect may be very remote". There is nothing in the
      skeleton or in the Court of Appeal's treatment of the appellant's
      argument to indicate that it was suggested on the appellant's behalf
      that the prospect of committal having a coercive effect was not only
      remote but non-existent.

  18. In any event, in as much as the medical evidence indicated that
      committal would not induce the appellant to comply with SIAC's order
      of 19 July 2007, there is no reason to suppose that this was not
      accepted by the Court of Appeal. In para 8 of his judgment Longmore
      LJ set out the detailed summary of the medical evidence that SIAC had
      provided in para 47 of its judgment. This included Dr Payne's opinion
      that the appellant's mental health difficulties were not causing his
      refusal to disclose his identity. That refusal, in Dr Deeley's
      opinion, was based "on an understandable fear" that his family might
      be mistreated or tortured if he did make the required disclosure and
      that he might himself be deported and subjected to ill-treatment or
      torture. It was Dr Deeley's view that this fear and the appellant's
      motivation in refusing to disclose his identity were likely to endure
      even if his mental health problems were treated. SIAC's summary of
      the medical evidence also recorded the opinion, held by both Dr Payne
      and Dr Deeley, that sending the appellant to prison would result in
      his being uncooperative with prison authorities and mental health
      teams. Ultimately, this would lead to his re-admission to a
      psychiatric facility.

  19. All of this was recorded uncritically by Longmore LJ. Indeed, he
      expressly accepted (in paras 10 and 11) Mr Southey's criticism of
      SIAC for its disregard of the evidence of Dr Payne and Dr Deeley and
      for its expression of confidence that the appellant would not relapse
      into paranoid psychosis if he was sent to prison. Acceptance of the
      doctors' opinion as to the likely outcome if the appellant were
      returned to prison necessarily involves recognition that he would not
      comply with the order – in other words, that committal to prison
      would not have a coercive effect. And, indeed, there is nothing in
      the judgments of any of the members of the Court of Appeal that is
      remotely suggestive of a view that sending the appellant to prison
      would bring about a change of heart on his part. The judgments of the
      majority make it clear that the committal was required in order to
      punish, not to induce compliance of, the contempt.

  20. It is plain that the second argument against committing the appellant
      – that this would cause him to relapse to a psychotic state – was
      dealt with on an entirely different basis from that which was
      considered by SIAC. That the Court of Appeal dealt with this as a de
      novo assessment is beyond argument. Its conclusions on this aspect of
      the case were premised on the real risk that such a state would
      develop but that this did not contraindicate a prison sentence
      because of the arrangements that were in place which would enable his
      transfer to hospital if it materialised. This is completely different
      from the basis on which SIAC decided that committal to prison was
      appropriate.

  21. There is nothing therefore in the appellant's claim that there has
      not been a de novo examination of the question of whether he should
      be sent to prison because of his admitted contempt. What then of his
      complaint that the affirmation of the four months' sentence imposed
      by SIAC constituted unacceptable deference to that court's decision?
      In considering this issue it is necessary at the outset to draw a
      distinction between, on the one hand, the validity of the decision to
      make a committal order and, on the other, the selection of the
      sentence necessary to achieve the objects of the order. Here the
      basis for SIAC's decision that a committal order should be made was
      found to be misconceived. That has been corrected by the Court of
      Appeal's re-consideration of that issue on what it perceived to be
      the true import of the evidence. That re-assessment has not been
      challenged on its merits. One must focus, therefore, on the question
      whether the Court of Appeal, in deciding that four months'
      imprisonment was not excessive, paid undue regard to SIAC's selection
      of that term as the appropriate sentence.

  22. The Court of Appeal was faced with a sentence chosen by SIAC on an
      erroneous basis but it was a sentence that was nevertheless designed
      to punish the contempt which SIAC had found to exist. On the hearing
      before the Court of Appeal the appellant had accepted that he was
      guilty of contempt. That court then had to consider whether a
      sentence of imprisonment should be imposed for the contempt. The
      majority concluded that it should be, albeit for different reasons
      than those found by SIAC. Having so concluded, it was entirely
      unexceptionable that the court should consider the propriety of the
      sentence which SIAC had chosen. This did not involve any deference to
      the SIAC's reasoning in deciding that a sentence of imprisonment
      should be imposed. It merely involved an examination of whether a
      sentence of four months' imprisonment was suitable, given that both
      SIAC and the majority of the Court of Appeal had both concluded that
      some term of imprisonment was required.

  23. Where an appellate court decides that the basis for the original
      sentencing was wrong, it may not be appropriate to consider the
      propriety of the sentence imposed solely by asking whether it was
      manifestly excessive. If the choice of sentence has been influenced
      by the reasons for finding that imprisonment is required, the
      sentence chosen may be open to challenge on that basis, quite apart
      from considerations of obvious immoderation. In the present case,
      however, the sentence imposed by SIAC was not determined by the
      reasons that it had concluded that imprisonment was appropriate. The
      length of the sentence was not influenced by the conclusion that the
      appellant would not relapse into paranoid psychosis. It was chosen to
      reflect the seriousness of the appellant's contempt. It was therefore
      not inappropriate for the Court of Appeal to consider whether the
      sentence imposed was manifestly excessive.

  24. In light of that conclusion, the first certified question does not
      require an answer. The Court of Appeal concentrated exclusively on
      the propriety of the length of sentence in order to decide how long
      the appellant should serve as punishment for his contempt. There was
      nothing untoward about testing that decision against the sentence
      chosen by SIAC since it was engaged on essentially the same exercise
      as that on which the Court of Appeal was required to embark. There is
      no reason that the Court of Appeal should ignore SIAC's sentence. To
      do so would be artificial. It would introduce an air of unreality
      about the sentencing exercise. I would answer the second certified
      question that an appellate court need only remit a case where a first
      instance judgment regarding sentence imposed in a contempt case was
      flawed and/or procedurally unfair if it considers that a fresh
      investigation of new facts is required and it is necessary or
      desirable that this be undertaken by the first instance court.

  25. I would dismiss the appeal.