      Michaelmas Term
      [2009] UKSC 16
      On appeal from: [2008] EWCA Civ 1082
      [2009] EWCA Civ 634


          JUDGMENT

              Ahmed Mahad (previously referred to as AM) (Ethiopia)
              (Appellant) v Entry Clearance Officer (Respondent)

              Sahro Ali (previously referred to as SA) (Somalia) and Amal
              Wehelia (previously referred to as AW) (Somalia) (Appellants)
              v Entry Clearance Officer (Respondent)

              Malyun Ismail (previously referred to as MI) (Somalia) and
              Khadra Abdillahi (previously referred to as KA) (Somalia)
              (Appellants) v Entry Clearance Officer (Respondent)

              Vettivetpillai Sakthivel (previously referred to as VS) (Sri
              Lanka) (Appellant) v Entry Clearance Officer (Respondent)

              Abdi-Malik Muhumed (previously referred to as AM (No. 2))
              (Somalia) (Appellant) v Entry Clearance Officer (Respondent)

          before

          Lord Hope, Deputy President
          Lord Rodger
          Lord Brown
          Lord Collins
          Lord Kerr

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          16 December 2009

          Heard on 9, 10 and 11 November 2009


           

      Appellant (AM 1)
      Manjit Gill QC
      James Collins
      (Instructed by Sheikh and Co Solicitors) 	  	Respondent
      Monica Carss-Frisk QC
      Jonathan Hall
      (Instructed by Treasury Solicitors)
        	  	 
      Appellant (AM 2)
      Michael Fordham QC
      Joanna Stevens
      (Instructed by Refugee and Migrant Justice) 	  	Appellant (MI and KA)
      Lord Pannick QC
      Rory O'Ryan
      (Instructed by Jackson & Canter LLP)
        	  	 
      Appellant (SA and AW)
      Michael Fordham QC
      Philip Nathan
      Sophie Weller
      (Instructed by Hersi & Co Solicitors) 	  	Appellant (VS)
      Manjit Gill QC
      Danny Bazini
      Alexis Slatter
      (Instructed by Kingston and Richmond Law Centre)
        	  	 
        	  	Intervener
      Catherine Casserley
      (Instructed by Equality & Human Rights Commission)


           

          LORD BROWN

   1. Part 8 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 395),
      entitled Family Members, contains a number of rules setting out the
      conditions to be satisfied by various categories of family members
      seeking leave to enter the UK to settle with other family members
      already settled here ("sponsors" as the Rules describe some of them).
      Rule 281 deals with spouses (or, following amendment, civil
      partners); rule 297 with children; rule 317 with parents,
      grandparents and other dependant relatives. All of them include a
      requirement that those seeking entry will be able to be accommodated
      and maintained here without recourse to public funds. The single most
      important question for decision on each of these five conjoined
      appeals is whether this requirement permits third party support (as
      the appellants submit) or whether it precludes maintenance provided
      by anyone other than the sponsor (as the respondent entry clearance
      officers (ECOs) contend).

   2. Three of the appellants - AM(1), SA (with her 6 year-old daughter,
      AW) and AM(2) – seek to join their spouses under rule 281. The other
      two appellants applied to enter under rule 317 – VS to join his son;
      KA (with her 11-year old granddaughter, MI) to join her daughter
      (MI's aunt) and another granddaughter (MI's adult cousin). Strictly,
      MI's application should have been considered under rule 297 but
      sensibly it has been treated throughout as standing or falling with
      KA's case under rule 317. Whilst, therefore, rule 297 is not directly
      in point in any of these cases, its terms (both before and after
      amendment in 2000) have loomed large in the argument and in the
      developing case law.

   3. The specified requirements as to accommodation and maintenance under
      each of the three rules can conveniently be set out at this point.

      Rule 281 (spouses):

                  "(iv) there will be adequate accommodation for the
                  parties and any dependants without recourse to public
                  funds in accommodation which they own or occupy
                  exclusively; and

                  (v) the parties will be able to maintain themselves and
                  any dependants adequately without recourse to public
                  funds."

      Rule 297 (children):

                  "(iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join
                  without recourse to public funds in accommodation which
                  the parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to
                  join, own or occupy exclusively; and

                  (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join,
                  without recourse to public funds."

      With effect from 2 October 2000 (Statement of Changes in Immigration
      Rules (Cm 4851)) those two requirements were substituted for a single
      previous requirement:

                  "(iv) can, and will, be maintained and accommodated
                  adequately without recourse to public funds in
                  accommodation which the parent, parents or relative own
                  or occupy exclusively."

      Rule 317 (as amended by Cm 4851) (other dependent relatives):

                  "(iii) is financially wholly or mainly dependent on the
                  relative present and settled in the United Kingdom; and

                  (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together
                  with any dependants, without recourse to public funds, in
                  accommodation which the sponsor owns or occupies
                  exclusively; and

                  (iva) can, and will, be maintained adequately, together
                  with any dependants, without recourse to public funds."

   4. Put shortly, the earlier case law on these rules has been as follows.
      First, Collins J in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
      Ex parte Arman Ali [2000] INLR 89 (judgment, 28 October 1999) held
      that rule 281(v) and (the unamended) rule 297(iv) did not preclude
      long-term maintenance by third parties. Next, the Asylum and
      Immigration Tribunal (AIT) (presided over by Hodge J) in AA (Third
      Party Maintenance) Bangladesh [2005] Imm AR 328 (judgment, 21 April
      2005) held that rule 297(v) (as amended) requires that the parent,
      whom the child is joining, must himself maintain the child; "Third
      party support by relatives or otherwise cannot satisfy the rule"
      (para 30). Finally, the Court of Appeal (Tuckey, Lawrence Collins and
      Rimer LJJ) in MW (Liberia) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2008] 1 WLR 1068 (judgment, 20 December 2007) endorsed 
      AA's construction of rule 297(v). Tuckey LJ in the leading judgment
      observed (para 16):

                  "Third party arrangements of the kind in question in this
                  case are necessarily more precarious and . . . more
                  difficult to verify. Furthermore the rules do not provide
                  for undertakings to be taken from third parties. These
                  are policy reasons which I think justified the
                  amendment."

      Lawrence Collins LJ, "with some regret", agreed with that
      construction of rule 297(v), expressing, at para 20, the "hope that
      consideration can be given to amending the rule, consistently with
      the policy considerations mentioned by Tuckey LJ . . . , to
      facilitate reunion where there is verifiable evidence of long-term
      support from third parties."

      These cases were the essential backdrop to the two decisions
      presently under appeal to this Court which I must now briefly
      explain.

   5. The Court of Appeal (Pill, Laws and Carnwath LJJ) in AM (Ethiopia) v
      Entry Clearance Officer [2008] EWCA Civ 1082 (judgment, 16 October
      2008) (AM (Ethiopia)) was concerned with all the present appellants
      save AM(2) (and save for a further applicant for entry clearance, MB,
      whose appeal was allowed and who is no longer involved in these
      proceedings). The majority of the Court held that all three rules
      "disallow reliance on third party support" (para 56 of Laws LJ's
      leading judgment, agreed to by Pill LJ). Carnwath LJ, recognising
      that the Court was bound by the decision in MW (Liberia), agreed that
      third party support is precluded under rules 281(v) and 297(v) but
      would have held it permissible under rule 317(iva). He would
      therefore have allowed the appeals of KA and MI, although not of VS,
      because he thought that VS in any event failed to satisfy the
      requirement under rule 317(iii) – the correctness of this being
      another issue now before us. There was a further basis too on which
      Carnwath LJ would have allowed the appeals of KA and MI. Laws LJ and
      Carnwath LJ (Pill LJ reserving his judgment on the point) held that
      rules 297 and 317 allow support by joint sponsors. Pill LJ and Laws
      LJ, however, Carnwath LJ dissenting on this point also, held that,
      where joint sponsorship is being relied upon, this has to be made
      plain by the naming of each sponsor as such in the application form.
      This too is now an issue before us. The Court unanimously rejected
      both an argument that article 8 of the European Convention on Human
      Rights (the Convention) required the rules to be read as necessarily
      permitting third party support and a separate article 8 ground of
      appeal in AM(1)'s case.

   6. In the result, the Court of Appeal dismissed all the appeals before
      them save those of (a) MB, already mentioned, whose case was remitted
      to the AIT for reconsideration of his independent article 8 claim,
      and (b) AM(1), whose sponsor was in receipt of Disability Living
      Allowance (DLA) - a benefit previously held by the Court of Appeal
      (Sedley and Rimer LJJ, Pill LJ dissenting) in MK (Somalia) v Entry
      Clearance Officer [2007] EWCA Civ 1521 (judgment, 28 November 2007)
      to be part of the sponsor's own funds – and whose case was remitted
      to the AIT for assessment of whether her DLA was in fact sufficient
      to provide the necessary support. The AIT thereafter held that it was
      not and so dismissed AM(1)'s appeal. Under the Court of Appeal's main
      ruling, however, AM(1) had been held unable to rely on other third
      party funding and so remains party to this further appeal.

   7. The other decision now under appeal before us is that of the Court of
      Appeal (Mummery, Maurice Kay and Elias LJJ) in AM (Somalia) v Entry
      Clearance Officer [2009] EWCA Civ 634 (judgment, 1 July 2009) (AM 
      (Somalia)), dealing with AM(2)'s case. By this decision the Court
      rejected AM(2)'s argument that, in the case of a disabled sponsor
      incapable of work (such as his wife was said to be), the effect of
      articles 8 and 14 of the Convention is that the maintenance
      requirement in rule 281(v) is to be read down or, if necessary,
      wholly disapplied. AM(2) expressly reserved his position on third
      party support and on article 8, issues upon which the Court was
      clearly bound by the main decision now under appeal, AM (Ethiopia).

   8. Before coming to consider the central question of construction before
      us, it is necessary first to set out certain further rules
      extensively relied upon in argument:

      Rule 6 (the interpretation rule) (as amended by Cm 6339) provides
      that:

                  "'sponsor' means the person in relation to whom an
                  applicant is seeking leave to enter or remain as their
                  spouse, fiancé, civil partner, proposed civil partner,
                  unmarried partner, same-sex partner or dependent
                  relative, as the case may be, under paragraphs 277 to
                  295O or 317 to 319."

      Two things may be noted in passing about this definition of sponsor.
      First, that it has evolved down the years: originally there was no
      such definition, then it was confined to spouses (rule 281); then
      extended to include relatives being joined by adult dependants (rule
      317). Secondly, even to this day it has never included "the parent,
      parents or relative" whom a child is seeking to join under rule 297.

   9. Next, rule 6A (as inserted by Cm 4851):

                  "For the purpose of these Rules, a person is not to be
                  regarded as having (or potentially having) recourse to
                  public funds merely because he is (or will be) reliant in
                  whole or in part on public funds provided to his sponsor,
                  unless, as a result of his presence in the United
                  Kingdom, the sponsor is (or would be) entitled to
                  increased or additional public funds."

      Finally (for the moment), rule 35:

                  "A sponsor of a person seeking leave to enter or
                  variation of leave to enter or remain in the United
                  Kingdom may be asked to give an undertaking in writing to
                  be responsible for that person's maintenance and
                  accommodation for the period of any leave granted,
                  including any further variation. Under the Social
                  Security Administration Act 1992 . . . , the Department
                  of Social Security . . . may seek to recover from the
                  person giving such an undertaking any income support paid
                  to meet the needs of the person in respect of whom the
                  undertaking has been given."

          (The rule also now provides for the Home Office to recover
          pursuant to such an undertaking whatever amount may be
          attributable to NASS support given to an asylum seeker.)

  10. There is really no dispute about the proper approach to the
      construction of the Rules. As Lord Hoffmann said in Odelola v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230, 1233
      (paragraph 4):

                  "Like any other question of construction, this [whether a
                  rule change applies to all undetermined applications or
                  only to subsequent applications] depends upon the
                  language of the rule, construed against the relevant
                  background. That involves a consideration of the
                  immigration rules as a whole and the function which they
                  serve in the administration of immigration policy."

      That is entirely consistent with what Buxton LJ (collecting together
      a number of dicta from past cases concerning the status of the rules)
      had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal ([2009] 1 WLR 126) and,
      indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House of Lords decision in 
      Odelola) in the present case. Essentially it comes to this. The Rules
      are not to be construed with all the strictness applicable to the
      construction of a statute or a statutory instrument but, instead,
      sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning of the words
      used, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of
      State's administrative policy. The respondent's counsel readily
      accepted that what she meant in her written case by the proposition
      "the question of interpretation is . . . what the Secretary of State
      intended his policy to be" was that the court's task is to discover
      from the words used in the Rules what the Secretary of State must be
      taken to have intended. After all, under section 3(2) of the
      Immigration Act 1971, the Secretary of State has to lay the Rules
      before Parliament which then has the opportunity to disapprove them.
      True, as I observed in Odelola (para 33): "the question is what the 
      Secretary of State intended. The rules are her rules." But that
      intention is to be discerned objectively from the language used, not
      divined by reference to supposed policy considerations. Still less is
      the Secretary of State's intention to be discovered from the
      Immigration Directorates' Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently
      to guide immigration officers in their application of the rules. IDIs
      are given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act
      which provides that:

                  "In the exercise of their functions under this Act
                  immigration officers shall act in accordance with such
                  instructions ( not inconsistent with the immigration
                  rules) as may be given them by the Secretary of State . .
                  ." (emphasis added).

  11. It is evident that IDIs have on occasion been issued inconsistently
      with the Rules as interpreted by the courts. A plain instance of this
      was an instruction issued in April 2001 stating in relation to rule
      281 that support for a married couple from their families in the UK
      "would not satisfy the Rules, which require the couple to maintain
      themselves", an instruction flatly contrary to Collins J's unappealed
      decision some 18 months earlier in Arman Ali. Whilst I would readily
      ascribe such an inconsistency to a regrettable lack of coordination
      rather than characterise it (as the appellants suggest) as "a matter
      of great constitutional concern", for my part I found the series of
      IDIs canvassed before us (in any event incomplete for want of any
      retained archive of such instructions, another thing to be regretted)
      singularly unhelpful on the issue of construction.

  12. The critical paragraphs of the Rules for the court's interpretation
      here are those dealing with maintenance, not accommodation. But an
      important part of the context for their interpretation is the way in
      which the parallel accommodation requirements have been construed. As
      to this, the position is well established: rules 281(iv), 297(iv) and
      317(iv) all allow "the parties" (the language of rule 281, but a
      convenient expression also to describe other family members applying
      to be re-united) to live together in accommodation owned and
      provided, quite possibly free, by a third party. So much, indeed,
      Laws LJ was prepared to accept (paras 45 and 61 of his judgment
      below) and the respondent now concedes.

  13. It is important to notice also certain other funds or forms of
      assistance (besides the provision of accommodation) accepted to be
      legitimately available to "the parties" in satisfying the maintenance
      requirement. One of these is DLA, a benefit which, as already
      mentioned, the settled relative can use as he or she likes (with any
      necessary care possibly being provided free by a friend or relative).

  14. Rule 6A is itself noteworthy in this regard: implicit in it is that
      the sponsor is at liberty to rely on whatever public funds he or she
      is entitled to, provided only that the arrival of the family
      member(s) seeking entry will not increase that entitlement.

  15. Next to be noted is that third party support in fact is recognised to
      be acceptable so long as there is a legal obligation to provide it.
      Tuckey LJ recognised in MW (Liberia) (para 14) that "money received
      by a parent under a deed of covenant or court order for maintenance
      might qualify if it could be shown that the legal obligation to pay
      it was being or was likely to be met". Laws LJ below, citing that
      passage, added (para 60): "Money received by a sponsor through such a
      route is as much his own as is salary paid by his employer." But this
      brings me to another point: the recognition that salary payable by an
      employer clearly qualifies as part of the funds available to the
      sponsor for the parties' maintenance applies no less in the case of
      employment generously provided by a friend or relative than
      employment in the open labour market. Naturally, in either case, it
      is for the parties to satisfy the ECO that the employment will
      continue or that other employment will, if necessary, replace it so
      that on entry the applicant will not be a drain on public funds. But
      why should employment by a benevolent (perhaps wealthy) friend or
      relative necessarily be any more precarious than arm's length
      employment in the open market? It may well be less so. And in any
      event, in all these cases, it is for the sponsor to satisfy the ECO
      that one way or another the parties will be able to maintain
      themselves "without recourse to public funds". The very premise of
      the debate is that the sponsor will be able to do so.

  16. Why, in these circumstances, should one read into the maintenance
      requirement a prohibition against kinds of third party financial
      support other than those already noted? Why refuse to consider, for
      example, promises of continuing regular payments by close friends
      and/or relations (as in each of the five cases before us)? Why should
      one read the expressions "will be able to maintain themselves" (rule
      281(v)), "can, and will, be maintained adequately by the [relative]
      the child is seeking to join" (rule 297(v)), "can, and will, be
      maintained adequately" (rule 317(iva)) as meaning or necessarily
      implying "without assistance from third parties" rather than meaning
      simply "will be able to cope financially"?

  17. Importantly, each maintenance requirement paragraph ends with the
      words "without recourse to public funds". That plainly is the
      governing consideration in all these provisions (those words being,
      indeed, on one reading mere surplusage if a prohibition against third
      party support is already explicitly or implicitly to be found in the
      first part of these provisions). The respondent invites us to read
      these paragraphs as if they also said "and without recourse to third
      party support". But that would seem to me an artificial rather than a
      natural reading, particularly given the odd and unsatisfactory
      distinctions made by the respondent in drawing the suggested boundary
      between those kinds of third party support which are acceptable and
      those which are said to be regarded as outlawed.

  18. The suggested rationale for construing these rules in the way
      contended for by the respondent is essentially that suggested by
      Tuckey LJ in MW (Liberia) (para 16): first, to avoid the need to
      investigate third party promises of financial support which are
      "necessarily more precarious and . . . more difficult to verify";
      and, secondly, to avoid ECOs accepting promises which cannot be
      backed by enforceable undertakings under rule 35: "the rules do not
      provide for undertakings to be taken from third parties". Much the
      same concerns, indeed, have been expressed and elaborated upon by
      Elias LJ in AM (Somalia) (para 73) – suggesting that "potentially
      significant administrative costs will be involved in testing the
      reliability of third party promises" - and Wall LJ in KS (India) v
      Entry Clearance Officer [2009] EWCA Civ 762 (para 57).

  19. Whilst I readily acknowledge the legitimacy of each of these
      concerns, their strength seems to me much diminished by a number of
      considerations. First, whilst I accept that generally speaking
      unenforceable third party promises are likely to be more precarious
      and less easily verifiable than a sponsor's own legal entitlements,
      that will not invariably be so. And it would surely be somewhat
      anomalous if ECOs could accept promises of continuing accommodation
      and/or employment and yet not promises of continuing payments,
      however regularly they can be shown to have been made in the past and
      however wealthy the third party can be seen to be. Are rich and
      devoted uncles (or, indeed, large supportive immigrant communities
      such as often assist those seeking entry) really to be ignored in
      this way? A second consideration, never to be lost sight of, is that
      it is always for the applicant to satisfy the ECO that any third
      party support relied upon is indeed assured. If he fails to do so,
      his application will fail. That this may be difficult was recognised
      by Collins J himself in Arman Ali (page 103):

                  "I do not doubt that it will be rare for applicants to be
                  able to satisfy an entry clearance officer, the Secretary
                  of State or an adjudicator that long-term maintenance by
                  a third party will be provided so that there will be no
                  recourse to public funds. But whether or not such
                  long-term support will be provided is a question of fact
                  to be determined on the evidence."

      Of course there may be difficulties of investigation. But that is
      already so with regard to many different sorts of application and,
      indeed, is likely to be so with regard to some of the kinds of third
      party support already conceded to be acceptable.

  20. With regard to rule 35 undertakings, a number of points arise. First,
      the rule does not apply to those seeking entry for a child under rule
      297: as already noted (para 8 above), the rule 6 definition of
      "sponsor" does not include them. Secondly, it is entirely a matter of
      discretion whether in any particular case an undertaking is sought
      and, indeed, even assuming it is sought and declined, whether entry
      clearance is then refused. Thirdly, these sorts of maintenance
      requirements long ante-date the present definition of "sponsor" so
      that it would be wrong to define the scope of the former by reference
      to the latter. Fourth, if the Secretary of State wishes to increase
      his opportunities of obtaining undertakings in respect of maintenance
      commitments, he can easily amend rules 6 and/or 35 to achieve this.
      Indeed, given our conclusion on the joint sponsorship issue to which
      I shall shortly come, the Secretary of State already has wider
      opportunities than he presently recognises. It is open to ECOs to ask
      a third party offering long-term support to become a joint sponsor
      and give an undertaking to underwrite his commitment.

  21. Standing back from the detail for a moment, I am strongly inclined to
      construe the maintenance requirements in each of these three rules in
      the same way, as indeed the majority of the Court of Appeal did in 
      AM (Ethiopia). Policy considerations aside, there seems to me no
      sufficient basis for reaching different conclusions on the issue of
      third party support depending on which rule or which version of the
      particular rule one is construing. No doubt, depending on the precise
      language of the particular rule at any given time, one of the
      competing linguistic arguments becomes marginally easier, the other
      marginally more difficult. In the end, however, none of the
      variations seems to me in any way decisive of the meaning. (Carnwath
      LJ, of course, had no option but to construe the rules differently,
      given his view of the ordinary meaning of the words used but
      recognising the constraints of stare decisis upon him.)

  22. The odd position hitherto arrived at is that Collins J in Arman Ali 
      thought that rule 281 and the unamended rule 297 allowed third party
      support; Hodge J in AA (Bangladesh) and the Court of Appeal in MW
      (Liberia) thought that the change in rule 297 made all the difference
      so that third party support could no longer be relied upon under that
      rule. And now in AM (Ethiopia) the majority of the Court of Appeal
      has decided that the change in rule 297 did not after all introduce a
      prohibition on third party support but merely clarified what the rule
      had always stipulated.

  23. For my part I would agree that the amendment to rule 297 was neither
      intended nor apt to alter the rule's meaning with regard to third
      party support. Rather, it seems that the amendment was a child
      protection measure, designed to ensure that children should indeed be
      coming to live with the relative(s) they are supposed to be joining
      and not somebody else entirely. So much, indeed, seems to have been
      confirmed by the departmental response to a Freedom of Information
      Act request made by some of the appellants as to the reasons for the
      rule change. It seems to me, moreover, instructive to note that at
      the same time as rule 297 was being amended, rule 317(iva) was being
      introduced in its present form as too was rule 310(iv) with regard to
      adopted children – requiring that the child "can, and will, be
      accommodated and maintained adequately without recourse to public
      funds in accommodation which the adoptive parent or parents own or
      occupy exclusively", ie in effectively identical terms to the un
      amended rule 297.

  24. Thus far, I have considered this group of rules under Part 8 without
      reference to the differing sorts of maintenance requirements imposed
      in other parts of the rules. There are arguments here available to
      both sides.

  25. Seemingly in favour of the respondent's contention – although I did
      not understand the Secretary of State to take the point – are rules
      41(vi) and 56K(vii) (as inserted by Cm 7074) under Part 2 governing
      respectively visitors and student visitors and in each case providing
      that the visitor: "will maintain and accommodate himself and any
      dependants adequately out of resources available to him without
      recourse to public funds or taking employment; or will, with any
      dependants, be maintained and accommodated adequately by relatives or
      friends." Certainly a contrast is struck there between self-support
      "out of resources available to him" and support "by relatives or
      friends" and it could be argued that the maintenance requirements
      under Part 8 (whilst, of course, saying nothing in terms as to "out
      of resources available to him") are closer to the former than the
      latter.

  26. As against that, there are a number of rules under Parts 6 and 7
      which on any view make it clear that the applicant for entry cannot
      rely on third party support. Prominent amongst these are:

          (a) rule 201 which requires a person intending to establish
          himself here in business to show amongst other things: "(ix) that
          his share of the profits of the business will be sufficient to
          maintain and accommodate himself and any dependants without
          recourse to employment (other than his work for the business) or
          to public funds";

          (b) rule 232 which requires that a person seeking to enter as a
          writer, composer or artist must show that he "(iv) will be able
          to maintain and accommodate himself and any dependants from his
          own resources without working except as a writer, composer or
          artist and without recourse to public funds"; and

          (c) rule 263 which requires that someone seeking entry clearance
          as a retired person of independent means must show that he:
          "(iii) is able and willing to maintain and accommodate himself
          and any dependants indefinitely in the United Kingdom from his
          own resources with no assistance from any other person and
          without taking employment or having recourse to public funds."

  27. It is strongly argued on behalf of the appellants that these are the
      kinds of provisions needed to prohibit reliance on third party
      support and that they are conspicuously lacking from the Part 8
      maintenance requirements. There is nothing in the rules we are
      construing to say, for example, that the maintenance must come "from
      his [or his sponsor's] own resources with no assistance from any
      other person".

  28. Although for my part I would in any event have accepted the
      appellant's contended for construction of the three rules here at
      issue and hold MW (Liberia) to have been wrongly decided even without
      resort to the contrasting language of these other rules, I am
      decidedly more impressed by the comparison with the Parts 6 and 7
      rules than the Court of Appeal appears to have been. If, indeed, the
      Secretary of State was intent on ruling out third party support in
      family reunification cases, even assuming that it could be verified
      as reliable, then he could perfectly well have made that plain by
      using the same sort of language as in the Parts 6 and 7 cases.

  29. I should note at this point a further argument advanced by the
      appellants based on article 8 of the Convention. Essentially this is
      to the effect that it was not in fact open to the Secretary of State
      to make plain an intention to rule out third party support in family
      reunification cases and, indeed, he could not now do so for the
      future. That, it is said, would necessarily be incompatible with the
      article 8 rights of those seeking family reunification. It is one
      thing, runs the argument, to ensure that the public purse is
      safeguarded by insisting on the verification and reliability of third
      party promises of support; quite another to rule out such support
      even if it can be verified as reliable. The former is accepted to be
      justifiable and proportionate even though it may result in families
      being kept apart; the latter not so. It will readily be appreciated
      that a corollary of this argument is that, even if on their natural
      and ordinary meaning the present maintenance requirements would be
      understood to prohibit third party financial support, they should be
      construed not to do so to avoid violations of article 8.

  30. I should also briefly note the respondent's arguments to the
      contrary. Essentially these are, first, that by no means all refusals
      of entry clearance under the relevant Part 8 rules will interfere
      with article 8 rights. This is perhaps most obviously so in cases
      under rule 317. But it is true also in cases where on the facts
      family reunification could take place abroad. Secondly, and in any
      event, there is simply no need to construe the Rules compatibly with
      the UK's obligations under the Convention. Convention compatibility
      is in any event ensured by rule 2 – which requires all ECOs and other
      immigration staff to act in compliance with the Human Rights Act 1998
      – and, if necessary, by a human rights appeal under section 84(1)(c)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. As the House of
      Lords said in Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department 
      [2007] 2 AC 167 (para 17):

                  "It is a premise of the statutory scheme enacted by
                  Parliament that an applicant may fail to qualify under
                  the rules and yet may have a valid claim by virtue of
                  article 8."

      It was essentially this second argument which prevailed below – see
      paras 33-40 of Laws LJ's judgment, agreed to by both the other
      members of the Court.

  31. Given, however, as already indicated, that I would in any event
      construe the existing rules as permitting of third party support
      without any reference to article 8 of the Convention, it is plainly
      unnecessary to decide the point. Obviously, were the Secretary of
      State now to amend the rules to exclude third party support – and
      Parliament not then disapprove them – it might well become necessary
      to do so. The argument could possibly be affected by the precise form
      of amendments made.

  32. So much for the primary issue before us. I turn altogether more
      briefly to the other issues arising. First, the question of joint
      sponsors. Although not raised as an issue in the Statement of Facts
      and Issues, the respondent wishes to challenge the conclusion of the
      majority in AM (Ethiopia) that rules 297 and 317 allow support by
      joint sponsors. As to this, the respondent emphasises the repeated
      reference in the Rules to the word sponsor in the singular, not least
      in rules 6, 6A and 35 which are suggested to be of particular
      relevance on this issue. The respondent, however, really has no
      answer to the commonsense question why a relative should not seek
      entry to join more than one person – for example his sons or brothers
      – nor to a particular point arising under rule 317(i)(e) and (f).
      These two subparagraphs each require that in particular circumstances
      the person seeking entry is "mainly dependent financially on
      relatives settled in the United Kingdom" (note the plural). True, in
      paragraph (iii), a further requirement for entry, the word "relative"
      returns to the singular; but it can hardly be thought to rule out
      say, a parent applying to join two daughters living together in the
      UK who have jointly funded the applicant's life abroad and propose
      continuing to do so in the UK. Most conclusive of all, perhaps, is
      section 78(6)(c) of the Social Security Administration Act 1992 (the
      statute referred to in rule 35) which refers to a person who has
      "either alone or jointly with a further person, given an undertaking
      in writing in pursuance of immigration rules within the meaning of
      the Immigration Act 1971 to be responsible for the maintenance and
      accommodation of the other person." As, moreover, already pointed out
      (para 21 above) such a conclusion actually assists the Secretary of
      State to obtain rule 35 undertakings where these are judged
      necessary.

  33. As to whether, in a case of proposed joint sponsorship, each sponsor
      must be named as such in the application form, the question becomes
      largely academic once it is recognised that third party financial
      support in any event falls to be taken into account under these Part
      8 rules. Indeed, as suggested above, it may well be the ECO, perhaps
      with a view to obtaining an undertaking, who suggests that the third
      party be treated as a joint sponsor. Certainly, so far as KA and MI's
      cases are concerned, it seems to me that KA's 22 year-old
      granddaughter, Ayan Abdi, could well have been treated as a joint
      sponsor with her mother, Anab Ahmed, and that, had third party
      support otherwise been precluded, it would not have been right to
      reject the application without at least giving Ayan Abdi the
      opportunity formally to become a joint sponsor. After all, the
      application form recorded in terms that "granddaughter, Ayan, will
      provide third party support", that "third party sponsor, Ayan, is in
      employment", that "Ayan will provide all living expenses" and that
      "the applicant's granddaughter will ensure sufficient income so there
      is no recourse to public funds". Having succeeded on the main issue,
      of course, KA and MI do not in fact need to succeed also on the joint
      sponsorship issue. Rather this was a second string to their bow.

  34. By contrast, VS does need to succeed also on the issue arising in his
      case under rule 317(iii), as to whether he had been "financially
      wholly or mainly dependent" on his son. The relevant facts found by
      the immigration judge as to this were as follows:

                  "65. I am satisfied that, since 2005 the appellant has
                  been in receipt of approximately £100 per month from the
                  UK. The source of that money has been Mr Arunan. Mr
                  Arunan has provided the money to the sponsor who has sent
                  it to his father. I am entirely satisfied that the money
                  from Mr Arunan was earmarked for the father. It was not
                  money given to the sponsor to do with as he wished. It
                  was for the father. As Mr Arunan said in his witness
                  statement 'I am helping him (the sponsor) financially
                  providing £100 a month to support his father. I am happy
                  to support (the appellant) and I am able to afford it.'

                  66. I am satisfied that the appellant is wholly or mainly
                  dependent on that money in Sri Lanka."

      On those facts the view taken successively by the immigration judge,
      the AIT and Carnwath LJ was that VS was not financially dependent on
      his son "but on the son's friend, Mr Arunan, who actually provided
      the money, the son being a mere 'conduit'" (para 109 of Carnwath LJ's
      judgment). Neither of the other members of the Court of Appeal
      expressed a view on this point, having in any event ruled out Mr
      Arunan's continuing financial support under rule 317(iva).

  35. I would respectfully disagree with this conclusion on rule 317(iii).
      This paragraph is concerned simply to establish the financial link
      between the dependent relative abroad and the relative settled here.
      Provided only that the relative abroad is getting funds on which he
      is wholly or mainly dependent and which he would not be getting save
      for his relative present and settled in the UK, that is sufficient.
      It is not necessary for the funds ever to have been part of the
      settled relative's own personal resources.

  36. Realistically, this issue falls to be decided in the same way as the
      main issue of third party support arising under rule 317(iva). I had
      wondered at one stage of the argument whether possibly, contrary to
      Carnwath LJ's view that rule 317(iva) could be more easily understood
      than the other Part 8 rules to allow third party financial support,
      it might, because of paragraph (iii), actually be the hardest to
      construe in that way. I am now satisfied, however, that, by the same
      token that the principal maintenance requirements are indifferent
      (save as to verification and reliability) as to the source of the
      funds which are going to maintain the applicant after arrival, so too
      rule 317(iii) is indifferent as to the source of the funds supporting
      the relative abroad, provided only that he receives them because of
      his settled relative here. Indeed, the relative abroad might well
      know nothing of the actual source of the funds, being aware only that
      they are sent regularly by his relative here. He understands himself
      to be dependent on his relative here and in my judgment he is right
      to do so. The rule is satisfied.

  37. One matter can be disposed of very shortly indeed, AM(1)'s submission
      that the AIT erred in law in dismissing his article 8 appeal and that
      the Court of Appeal were wrong to have rejected this contention.
      Essentially it was submitted, first, that, notwithstanding that the
      very recent decision of the House of Lords in Huang was before them,
      the AIT nevertheless failed to grasp that article 8 claims involve no
      additional test of exceptionality, and, secondly, that, although they
      acknowledged delay to be "a relevant factor" in the case, the AIT
      perversely gave insufficient weight to it. In my judgment there is
      nothing in either of these submissions and they were properly
      rejected by the court below (at paras 81-89 of Laws LJ's judgment,
      agreed to by both the other members of the court).

          38. The further matter I need just mention is the issue raised in 
          AM (Somalia) in respect of AM(2)'s sponsor's disability and
          articles 8 and 14 of the Convention (see para 7 above). Having
          indicated to counsel at the conclusion of the argument in AM
          (Ethiopia) our decision on the central issue of third party
          support, counsel for the respondent took specific instructions on
          AM(2)'s case and stated that in those circumstances there
          appeared to be no further objection to the grant of entry
          clearance. This being so, it was agreed that argument on the
          disability discrimination issue was unnecessary and that it would
          be appropriate for the Court merely to record that fact.

  38. So far as the other appeals are concerned, it was agreed that AM(1)'s
      appeal succeed and the Immigration Judge's order be restored and that
      the other 3 appeals be remitted to the AIT for redetermination in the
      light of our ruling that third party support is not precluded from
      consideration under the maintenance requirements of the relevant
      rules. Third party offers of financial assistance have been made in
      each of these cases: in AM(1) by his daughter and a nephew; in VS (as
      stated above) by Mr Arunan; in SA (and AW) by two relatives of the
      sponsor; and in KA (and MI) (as stated above) by KA's granddaughter,
      Ayan Abdi. Those offers will now have to be verified and assessed so
      that decisions can finally be reached as to whether all or any of
      these appellants can satisfy the requirement that they could be
      adequately maintained in the UK without recourse to public funds.

  39. I would accordingly allow all of these appeals and make the orders
      indicated.

  40. I add just two footnotes. First, I have thought it unnecessary to set
      out the facts of these cases beyond the very few details given above
      where these have been strictly necessary for the resolution of the
      issues before us. If anyone is interested in the fuller facts of
      these cases, he will find them admirably recounted in the judgments
      below.

  41. Secondly, throughout this judgment I have continued for convenience
      to refer to the appellants by their initials (as they have hitherto
      been known) notwithstanding that it was agreed by all that anonymity
      in these cases (at least for the adult appellants) is in fact quite
      unnecessary and therefore inappropriate. Although Mr Fordham QC left
      it to the court to decide whether the child, AW, should remain
      anonymous, once it is recognised that her mother, SA, is to be named,
      there could be no possible reason not to name AW also. The title of
      this judgment will duly record all the appellants' names in full.

          LORD HOPE

  42. I agree with the judgments of Lord Brown and Lord Kerr. For the
      reasons they give I too would allow the appeals and make the orders
      which Lord Brown proposes. I also agree with the judgment of Lord
      Collins.

          LORD RODGER

  43. I have read the judgments of Lord Brown and Lord Kerr. I agree with
      them and, for the reasons they give, I too would allow the appeals
      and make the orders which Lord Brown proposes.

          LORD COLLINS

  44. I am in complete agreement with the judgment of Lord Brown. I am now
      satisfied that MW (Liberia) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1376, [2008] 1 WLR 1068 (in which I was a
      member of the court) was wrongly decided.

  45. In that case the evidence was that friends of the mother had been
      giving her regular funds to support her child in Ghana, and would
      continue to do so if the child were given leave to enter the United
      Kingdom. The relevant rule was rule 297(v), which requires that that
      the child must show that the child "can, and will, be maintained
      adequately by the parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to
      join, without recourse to public funds."

  46. The court was influenced in its conclusion that this rule did not
      envisage third party support by the amendments in 2000 to the
      Immigration Rules. Prior to the changes maintenance and accommodation
      were dealt with in a single sub-rule which said "(iv) can, and will,
      be maintained and accommodated adequately without recourse to public
      funds in accommodation which the parent, parents or relative own or
      occupy exclusively." In R v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department Ex parte Arman Ali [2000] INLR 89, Collins J held that the
      unamended rule 297(iv) did not preclude third party funding. In MW
      (Liberia) the court was invited by the Secretary of State to draw the
      inference that the rule change was designed to make it clear that
      third party support was not envisaged by the rule. It is clear that
      that contention influenced the conclusion that the amendment was
      intended to have the effect that before entry would be allowed it had
      to be shown that the parent had adequate means to support the child:
      at [16], and see also [10]. I agreed with this conclusion with
      regret, and expressed the hope that consideration would be given to
      an amendment of the rule to facilitate reunion where there was
      verifiable evidence of long-term support.

  47. But the essential plank of this decision has been removed, since it
      is now reasonably clear that the purpose of the amendment was not to
      remove the possibility of third party support, but to meet the
      concern that children might be brought to the United Kingdom and end
      up living with someone other than the sponsor, under someone else's
      roof and at someone else's expense. It was a child protection
      measure.

  48. The overall point in these appeals is that the arguments for the
      Secretary of State were founded on the model of a nuclear
      self-supporting family, which is far removed from the reality of the
      situation in the typical immigration case. This is not a new
      phenomenon. Members of immigrant communities have always supported
      each other.

          LORD KERR

  49. I am in complete agreement with the judgment of Lord Brown and, for
      the reasons that he has given, I too would allow the appeals and make
      the orders that he proposes.

  50. The relevant rules (rules 281(v), 297(v) – latterly 297(iv) - and
      317(iva)) should be interpreted as permitting third party support. It
      is possible, if one isolates the words in rule 281(v), "maintain
      themselves", to regard them as connoting an ability to generate
      sufficient income oneself. Likewise, the words in rule 297(v) "can,
      and will, be maintained adequately by the parent", if separated from
      their context, might be considered to impose a requirement that the
      maintenance of the child be met by funds belonging exclusively to the
      parent. So to construe the rules would produce a distorted result for
      the reasons that Lord Brown has given. The relevant words in each
      provision must be read in conjunction with the phrase which also
      appears in both, "without recourse to public funds". They must also
      be considered in terms of the overall purpose of the provisions. The
      purpose is to ensure that there is no resort to public funds by
      family members entering the United Kingdom to join other family
      members already settled here. If it can be shown that funds are
      reliably available from a third party, that eventuality is avoided
      and the purpose of the rules is fulfilled.

  51. To interpret the rules as permitting third party support not only
      accords with their natural meaning, it avoids the anomaly referred to
      by Lord Brown in paragraph 12 of his judgment of permitting third
      party support for accommodation while denying it for maintenance.
      There is no logical reason for such a distinction and it would be
      remarkable if, within the same rule, strikingly similar formulations
      in relation respectively to accommodation and maintenance were
      employed to bring about a radically different outcome in each case –
      thus, in rule 281, according to the respondent, the requirement that
      there be "adequate accommodation for the parties and any dependants
      without recourse to public funds" (281(iv)) would permit third party
      support while a requirement that the parties be "able to maintain
      themselves and any dependants adequately without recourse to public
      funds" (281(v)) would forbid it. I cannot believe that such an
      incongruous result was intended.

  52. An interpretation of the relevant rules which prohibits third party
      support fails to accord any significance to the contrast between
      these provisions and those in Parts 6 and 7 which expressly stipulate
      that income or funds must be self generated (rules 201, 232 and 263,
      for instance). It is difficult to understand why, if the formulation
      used in rules 281 and 297 was intended to be and was efficacious to
      forbid third party support, it was not also employed in the relevant
      Parts 6 and 7 rules. It appears to me that the difference in language
      is far more likely to be indicative of an intention to permit funds
      from a third party source in the rules under consideration in these
      appeals while disallowing them in the rules where explicit language
      is used to achieve that result.

  53. The rationale which, it is said, underpins the exclusion of third
      party support in the relevant rules is that it is inherently more
      difficult to police and that it is precarious to rely on it in order
      to forestall recourse to public funds. In the first place, I question
      whether, even if it is more precarious, that is a legitimate basis on
      which to adopt an interpretation that seems at odds with the natural
      and plain meaning of the words. But, in any event, I have been
      persuaded, particularly by the examples given by Mr Fordham QC on
      behalf of the appellants, SA and AW, that the exceptions to self
      generated income that undeniably exist are at least as "precarious"
      as funds supplied by, say, a close relative. The vaunted
      precariousness of support from a third party source is, in my
      opinion, no greater than that which might arise in the course of the
      ordinary vagaries and vicissitudes of life. Promised employment may
      not materialise or may last for only a short time. Dependence on
      benefits received by the family member who is settled in the United
      Kingdom may cease. As Lord Brown has pointed out, there is no warrant
      for (and much to be said against) the view that third party support
      occupies a particular category of uncertainty.

  54. In any event, as the appellants have submitted, availability of third
      party support as a means of fulfilling the rules' requirements
      proceeds on the premise that the applicant can demonstrate that he or
      she will not be a drain on public funds. This may well prove a
      formidable hurdle in most cases. But it is entirely conceivable that
      support from a number of family members and friends of the person
      seeking to enter will be a more dependable resource and a more
      effective prevention of dependence on public funds than prospective
      employment. As Lord Pannick QC, for MI and KA, pointed out, the
      practical reality in many of these cases is that funding will come
      from a number of sources.

  55. On the construction to be placed on rule 317(iii) I am again in
      entire agreement with Lord Brown. This rule specifies that the person
      seeking indefinite leave to enter must be financially dependent on
      the relative present and settled in the United Kingdom. Does that
      mean that the UK resident must be in a position to meet the
      dependency of his relative from his own resources or does it merely
      mean that the financial dependency exists? In my view, the latter
      interpretation is plainly to be preferred. The import of the rule is
      to require that the UK resident should have the capacity to sustain
      his relative's dependency but there is nothing in its language that
      prohibits the funds from which he is able to do so coming from an
      external source. Financial dependency for the purposes of the rule is
      established by the fact of payment by the resident relative. It is
      not displaced from that condition simply because the money for the
      payment comes from a different source.