      Michaelmas Term<br [2009] UKSC 7<br On appeal from: [2009] EWCA Civ
      119


          JUDGMENT

              BA (Nigeria) (FC) (Respondent) v Secretary of State for the
              Home Department (Appellant) and others

              PE (Cameroon) (FC) (Respondent) v Secretary of State for the
              Home Department (Appellant)

              (Consolidated Appeals)

          before

          Lord Hope, Deputy President
          Lord Scott
          Lord Rodger
          Lady Hale
          Lord Brown

          JUDGMENT GIVEN ON


          26 November 2009

          Heard on 30 July 2009

      Appellant
      Elisabeth Laing QC
      Deok Joo Rhee
      (Instructed by Treasury Solicitors) 	  	Respondent (BA)
      Raza Husain
      Ronan Toal
      (Instructed by Turpin and Miller Solicitors)
        	  	 
      Respondent (PE)
      Raza Husain
      Ronan Toal
      (Instructed by Wilson and Co.) 	  	 

          LORD HOPE

   1. The ability of asylum seekers who make unsuccessful claims to be
      allowed to remain to discover further reasons why they should not be
      removed from the country where they seek refuge is an inescapable
      feature of any system that is put in place to meet a State's
      obligations under the Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees and
      article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The opportunity
      for further reasons to be put forward is enhanced by the fact that a
      series of decisions may need to be taken before a person's
      immigration status is resolved. Various measures have been put in
      place by the United Kingdom to deal with this phenomenon. Some of
      these measures are to be found in the Immigration Rules, and on
      occasion the meaning that is to be given to them is the subject of
      controversy: see ZT (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2009] UKHL 6, [2009] 1 WLR 348.

   2. In this case however we are concerned with meaning and effect of the
      statute. The relevant provisions are to be found in Part 5 of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which deals with
      immigration and asylum appeals. The question is whether the
      expression "an asylum claim, or a human rights claim" in section
      92(4)(a) of the 2002 Act includes any second or subsequent claim that
      the asylum seeker may make, or only a second or subsequent claim
      which has been accepted as a "fresh claim" by the Secretary of State
      under rule 353 of the Immigration Rules.

          The facts

   3. The first respondent BA is a citizen of Nigeria. He is married to a
      British citizen, by whom he has four children. He entered the United
      Kingdom in 1988 as a visitor. Initially he was given six months leave
      to enter. Later he was granted leave to remain as a student until the
      end of August 1991. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 25
      May 1994 on the basis of his marriage. On 20 May 2005, however, he
      was served with a decision by the Secretary of State that he was to
      be deported following his release on licence from a 10 year sentence
      of imprisonment for conspiracy to import class A drugs. His appeal
      against this decision to the asylum and immigration tribunal on human
      rights grounds failed. On 25 May 2007 he was served with a
      deportation order. On 25 June 2007 and 8 August 2007 further
      submissions were made on his behalf as to why he should not be
      deported. The Secretary of State agreed to consider his reasons for
      seeking revocation of the deportation order, but she declined to
      revoke it. Directions were then given for him to be removed from this
      country on 29 December 2007.

   4. The respondent PE is a citizen of Cameroon. He entered the United
      Kingdom clandestinely in August 2004. On 19 May 2005 he applied for
      asylum. The Secretary of State refused his application on 5 July
      2005. On 9 July 2005 it was decided that directions were to be given
      for his removal to Cameroon. He did not appeal against this decision.
      Before it was put into effect however he was sentenced to twelve
      months imprisonment for having a forged passport and using it to
      obtain work, to which he had pleaded guilty. As a result of this
      conviction the Secretary of State decided to make a deportation order
      against him. He appealed against this decision on asylum and human
      rights grounds, but his appeal was dismissed. The deportation order
      was signed, and it was served on him on 10 January 2007. On various
      dates thereafter his representatives made written representations on
      his behalf for the decision to be reconsidered. They claimed that he
      had been and would be persecuted in Cameroon on account of his
      homosexuality. The Secretary of State declined to reconsider her
      decision, as in her view his further representations did not amount
      to a fresh claim within the meaning of rule 353 of the Immigration
      Rules. He appealed to the tribunal against the Secretary of State's
      refusal to revoke her decision to make the order. The tribunal held
      that this decision was not an appealable decision.

   5. On 27 December 2007 BA applied for judicial review of the directions
      for his removal. He contended that he had a further in-country right
      of appeal. It was no part of his case that his further
      representations amounted to a fresh claim under rule 353 of the
      Immigration Rules. PE had already applied for judicial review of the
      decisions that had been made against him. He claimed that he had a
      right of appeal against a refusal to revoke the deportation order,
      that this right was exercisable in-country and that in any event the
      representations amounted to a fresh claim under rule 353. Permission
      was given in each case, and the applications were heard together by
      Blake J: [2008] EWHC 1140 (Admin); [2008] 4 All ER 798. The judge
      held that what determined whether there was an in-country right of
      appeal was whether or not the Secretary of State was satisfied under
      rule 353 there was a fresh claim: para 62. In his opinion neither
      claimant had an in-country right of appeal simply by virtue of having
      made a protection claim or having made fresh representations
      supported by different material: para 74. In PE's case he quashed the
      decision that his was not a fresh claim and remitted it for
      redetermination by the Secretary of State. He said that if the
      Secretary of State were to conclude that the claim is a fresh one but
      it was still refused, PE would have access to a right of appeal
      in-country before removal. But if it was not a fresh claim, his right
      to appeal would have to be exercised from abroad. As Sedley LJ
      observed in the Court of Appeal, this conclusion raises the same
      issue as that raised by BA's appeal: [2009] EWCA Civ 119; [2009] 2
      WLR 1370, para 4.

   6. Rule 353 of the Immigration Rules, on which the Secretary of State
      relies, is headed "Fresh claims". It provides:

              "353. When a human rights or asylum claim has been refused …
              and any appeal relating to that claim is no longer pending,
              the decision maker will consider any further submissions and,
              if rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a
              fresh claim. The submissions will amount to a fresh claim if
              they are significantly different from the material that has
              previously been considered. The submissions will only be
              significantly different if the content:

                  (i) had not already been considered; and

                  (ii) taken together with the previously considered
                  material, created a realistic prospect of success,
                  notwithstanding its rejection."

      Rule 353A, which needs to be read together with rule 353 to complete
      the picture, provides:

              "353A. Consideration of further submissions shall be subject
              to the procedures set out in these Rules. An applicant who
              has made further submissions shall not be removed before the
              Secretary of State has considered the submissions under
              paragraph 353 or otherwise.

              This paragraph does not apply to submissions made overseas."

          The 2002 Act

   7. This Act was passed in the light of strong pressure to streamline
      appeals against immigration decisions in the light of objections that
      were taken to the large number of repeat claims. Part 5 of the Act
      provides a general right of appeal against an immigration decision to
      an adjudicator: section 82(1). The expression "immigration decision"
      is defined in section 82(2). It includes, among other things, a
      decision that a person is to be removed from the United Kingdom who
      is here unlawfully, a decision to make a deportation order under
      section 5(1) of the Act and a refusal to revoke a deportation order
      under section 5(2): sections 82(2)(g), (j) and (k). Having defined
      this expression, the statute proceeds to lay down an elaborate system
      for the handling of appeals.

   8. Section 84(1) provides that an appeal under section 82(1) against an
      immigration decision must be brought under one or more of the grounds
      specified in that subsection. They include the following ground, with
      a view to ensuring that the United Kingdom complies with its
      international obligations:

              "(g) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in
              consequence of the immigration decision would breach the
              United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
              would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
              1998 as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention
              rights."

      This is the ground on which both BA and PE rely.

   9. Section 92 provides:

              "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is
              in the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which
              this section applies.

              (2) This section applies to an appeal against an immigration
              decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c), (d),(e),
              (f) . . . and (j).

              (3) This section also applies to an appeal against refusal of
              leave to enter the United Kingdom if -

                  (a) at the time of the refusal the appellant is in the
                  United Kingdom, and

                  (b) on his arrival in the United Kingdom the appellant
                  had entry clearance. ....

              (4) This section also applies to an appeal against an
              immigration decision if the appellant -

                  (a) has made an asylum claim, or a human rights claim,
                  while in the United Kingdom, or

                  (b) is an EEA national or a member of the family of an
                  EEA national and makes a claim to the Secretary of State
                  that the decision breaches the appellant's rights under
                  the Community Treaties in respect of entry to or
                  residence in the United Kingdom."

      The respondents' case is that section 92(4)(a) confers a suspensive
      in-country right of appeal unless the appeal has been certified under
      either section 94 or section 96 of the 2002 Act. It is suspensive
      because it suspends the operation of the immigration decision
      appealed against until the appeal has been disposed of.

  10. Section 94 excludes appeals in asylum and human rights cases if the
      Secretary of State certifies that they are clearly unfounded. The
      relevant subsections provide as follows:

              "(1) This section applies to an appeal under section 82(1)
              where the appellant has made an asylum claim or a human
              rights claim (or both).

              (2) A person may not bring an appeal to which this section
              applies in reliance on section 92(4)(a) if the Secretary of
              State certifies that the claim or claims mentioned in
              subsection (1) is or are clearly unfounded.

              ....

              (9) Where a person in relation to whom a certificate is
              issued under this section subsequently brings an appeal under
              section 82(1) while outside the United Kingdom, the appeal
              shall be considered as if he had not been removed from the
              United Kingdom."

  11. Section 96 removes the right of appeal altogether if the Secretary of
      State or an immigration officer certifies that the person has dealt
      with, or ought to have dealt with, the issue in an earlier appeal.
      The relevant subsections of section 96 are in these terms:

              "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration
              decision ("the new decision") in respect of a person may not
              be brought if the Secretary of State or an immigration
              officer certifies -

                  (a) that the person was notified of a right of appeal
                  under that section against another immigration decision
                  ("the old decision") (whether or not an appeal was
                  brought and whether or not any appeal brought has been
                  determined),

                  (b) that the claim or application to which the new
                  decision relates relies on a matter that could have been
                  raised in an appeal against the old decision, and

                  (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or the
                  immigration officer, there is no satisfactory reason for
                  that matter not having been raised in an appeal against
                  the old decision.

              (2) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration
              decision ("the new decision") in respect of a person may not
              be brought if the Secretary of State or an immigration
              officer certifies -

                  (a) that the person received a notice under section 120
                  by virtue of an application other than that to which the
                  new decision relates or by virtue of a decision other
                  than the new decision,

                  (b) that the new decision relates to an application or
                  claim which relies on a matter that should have been, but
                  has not been, raised in a statement made in response to
                  that notice, and

                  (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or the
                  immigration officer, there is no satisfactory reason for
                  that matter not having been raised in a statement made in
                  response to that notice."

  12. The expressions "asylum claim" and "human rights claim" are each
      defined in section 113(1). It provides:

              "In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears –

              "asylum claim" means a claim made by a person to the
              Secretary of State at a place designated by the Secretary of
              State that to remove the person from or to require him to
              leave the United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's
              obligations under the Refugee Convention,

              …

              "human rights claim" means a claim made by a person to the
              Secretary of State at a place designated by the Secretary of
              State that to remove the person from or to require him to
              leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of
              the Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to
              act contrary to Convention) as being incompatible with his
              Convention rights"

      Section 12 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 amends
      those definitions prospectively by adding in each case a provision
      that the expression:

              "does not include a claim which, having regard to a former
              claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of this Part
              in accordance with the immigration rules."

      As Sedley LJ observed in the Court of Appeal, under this amended
      formula a claim in any case where an earlier challenge to removal has
      been made and failed will only rank as an asylum claim or a human
      rights claim if it is a fresh claim under rule 353: [2009] 2 WLR 1370
      , para 27. The amendment has not yet been brought into force, as the
      entire system of immigration law is now under review. A Green Paper
      containing proposals to simplify the law was published in February
      2008, and it is expected that a Bill to simplify the law will be
      published towards the end of this year.

  13. No certificates under either section 94 or section 96 have been
      issued to the respondent in either case. They maintain that in these
      circumstances they are entitled to have their appeals heard
      in-country under section 92(4)(a), and that they cannot be removed
      from the United Kingdom until their appeals have been dealt with. The
      Secretary of State's contention is that an appeal against an
      immigration decision is available only out of country where, as in
      BA's case, the further representations have not been advanced as a
      fresh claim or, as in PE's case, have not been accepted as such by
      the Secretary of State. He maintains that their appeals must now be
      pursued out of country. If so, there is now no obstacle to the
      respondents being deported in accordance with the deportation orders
      that have been served on them.

          The competing arguments in more detail

  14. For the Secretary of State Miss Laing QC did not dispute that a right
      of appeal arises under section 82(1) when a decision that is an
      immigration decision is taken. Nor does she dispute that the
      Secretary of State's refusal in these cases not to revoke the
      deportation orders were immigration decisions within the meaning of
      section 82(2)(k) of the 2002 Act. What was in issue was whether the
      right of appeal against those decisions was to be exercised from
      within the United Kingdom. Her submission was that the words "an
      asylum claim, or a human rights claim" in section 92(4)(a) mean a
      first asylum or human rights claim or a second or subsequent asylum
      or human rights claim which has been accepted as a fresh claim under
      rule 353 of the Immigration Rules.

  15. She acknowledged that this was not the literal meaning of this
      provision, as the definitions of these expressions made no reference
      to the fact that the claims to which they referred had to be a first
      or a fresh claim. But she said that they had to be construed in the
      context of the scheme of the statute as a whole, and that they had to
      be read in the way she suggested to avoid an absurdity. She submitted
      that the authorities also showed that they had to be read subject to
      this qualification. She based this submission on two decisions of the
      Court of Appeal: Cakabay v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      (Nos 2 and 3) [1999] Imm AR 176 and R v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department, ex p Onibiyo [1996] QB 768. In each of these cases
      observations were made about the treatment of repeat claims for
      asylum in the context of the provisions of the Asylum and Immigration
      Appeals Act 1993.

  16. In Cakabay v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Nos 2 and 3) 
      [1999] Imm AR 176, 180-181, Schiemann LJ said:

              "The statute makes no express provision as to what is to be
              done in the case of repeated claims for asylum by the same
              person. The second claim may be identical to the first ('a
              repetitious claim') or may be different ('a fresh claim'). It
              is common ground that a fresh claim attracts all the
              substantive and procedural consequences of an initial claim
              whereas a repetitious claim does not.

              In the case of a repetitious claim no more is required to be
              done: the first decision has ensured that the United Kingdom
              has complied with its obligations under the Convention.
              Section 6 of the 1993 Act creates no inhibition on the
              claimant's removal: the Secretary of State has on the
              occasion of his decision on the first claim decided the
              repetitious claim. So far as the decision on the claimant's
              repetitious application for leave to enter is concerned, the
              claimant will be told that leave has already been refused and
              that there is no need for any new decision."

  17. In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Onibiyo 
      [1996] QB 768 the court had to consider whether, as a matter of law,
      a person might make more than one "claim for asylum" within the
      meaning of section 6 of the 1993 Act during a single uninterrupted
      stay in the United Kingdom. The Secretary of State argued that, once
      a person had made a claim for asylum, had had that claim refused and
      had unsuccessfully exercised his rights of appeal under section 9 of
      that Act, his legal rights were exhausted. There could be no further
      claim for asylum unless the claimant left the United Kingdom and
      returned before making a fresh application. At p 781 Sir Thomas
      Bingham MR rejected that argument. He said that it would undermine
      the beneficial object of the Convention if the making of an
      unsuccessful application for asylum were to be treated as modifying
      the obligation of the United Kingdom or depriving a person of the
      right to make a fresh "claim for asylum". He then discussed what
      constituted a fresh claim. At pp 783-784 he said that the acid test
      must always be whether, comparing the new claim with that which had
      been rejected, and excluding material on which the claimant could
      reasonably be expected to rely in the earlier claim, the new claim
      was sufficiently different from the earlier claim to admit of a
      realistic prospect that a favourable view could be taken of the new
      claim despite the unfavourable conclusion reached on the earlier
      claim.

  18. Miss Laing said that the same approach should be taken to the words
      used in section 92(4)(a) of the 2002 Act. She submitted that the
      intention of Parliament when enacting this provision had to be
      derived from the context, the legislative history and the
      requirements of the international instruments. The essential features
      of the 2002 Act remained the same as those in the 1993 Act. It was to
      be assumed that where the same words were used they were intended to
      have the same meaning. It was implicit in the approach that was taken
      in Ex p Onibiyo that the Convention did not require protection
      against removal if all that the further representations were doing
      was to repeat an earlier claim which had been considered and rejected
      on appeal. What the international instruments required was
      compliance, not redundancy. It was only a fresh claim that would be
      an obstacle to the claimant's removal, by converting what would
      otherwise be an out of country appeal into an appeal that must be
      dealt with in-country.

  19. As for the prospective amendment of section 113, she said that it did
      two things. It removed the requirement that a claim be made "at a
      place designated by the Secretary of State". And it clarified what
      section 113 should be taken to have meant on enactment. In the words
      of the Explanatory Notes, its purpose is to "clarify that further
      submissions which follow the refusal of an asylum or human rights
      claim but which do not amount to a fresh claim will not carry a
      further right of appeal." But it was of no assistance in resolving
      the argument either way as to the meaning of the definitions in their
      current form. Lloyd LJ was right when he said in the Court of Appeal
      that the amendment should be ignored: [2009] 2 WLR 1370, para 35.

  20. Mr Husain too submitted that the meaning of the words used in section
      94(2)(a) must be understood from their context. But he said that the
      context was markedly different from that in the 1993 Act. There was
      now a series of statutory provisions against abuse which were not to
      be found in the earlier legislation. It was those provisions, and not
      those instituted under the Immigration Rules by the executive, that
      should be used if it was thought that the appeals should not be dealt
      with in-country. The Secretary of State's approach rendered the new
      provisions otiose and unworkable in the case of second claims.

  21. For example, Parliament had provided by section 84(1)(g) that an
      appeal against an immigration decision might be taken on the ground
      that the person's removal from the United Kingdom would breach the
      State's obligations under the Refugee Convention. Section 84(1)(c)
      dealt with the situation where it was contended that the decision was
      unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. But the rights
      conferred by the European Convention on Human Rights were, in various
      respects, not the same: JM v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1402; [2007] Imm AR 293, para 27, per Laws
      LJ. If the Secretary of State was right that the appeal could only be
      taken in-country if it was certified under rule 353, the person would
      be forced to take his appeal out of country even although it was on
      grounds referred to in section 84(1)(g), which could be different
      from those advanced at an earlier stage under section 84(1)(c). As he
      would be without a certificate under section 94, he would be deprived
      of the benefit of section 94(9).

  22. As for what was said in R v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department, ex p Onibiyo, Mr Husain said that it was not the only
      relevant authority. Prior to the enactment of the 2002 Act there were
      two other important decisions to which reference should be made. In 
      R (Kariharan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002]
      EWCA Civ 1102, [2003] QB 933, reference was made to the one-stop
      procedure that was introduced by sections 74-77 of the Immigration
      and Asylum Act 1999 and to section 73 of that Act, which enabled the
      Secretary of State to certify that a claim that a decision of a
      decision-maker was in breach of the appellant's human rights could
      reasonably have been made earlier, the effect of which was that the
      appeal was to be treated as finally determined: see Auld LJ, para 30.
      In para 36 Sedley LJ said that those provisions gave ample powers to
      the Secretary of State to dispose summarily of repetitive and abusive
      appeals. In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p
      Saleem [2001] 1 WLR 443, 449, Roche LJ accepted that the right of
      appeal to an independent appellate body was a fundamental or basic
      right akin to the right of unimpeded access to a court, an
      infringement of which must be either expressly authorised by or arise
      by necessary implication from an Act of Parliament.

  23. Furthermore the approach that was taken in R v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department, ex p Onibiyo to the problem of repeat claims was
      imprecise and had been rendered unnecessary by the current
      legislation. In that case, as Sir Thomas Bingham MR recorded at p
      783, counsel for the applicant, Mr Blake QC, as he then was, had
      conceded that that a fresh "claim for asylum" could not be made by
      advancing, even with some elaboration or addition, a claim already
      made or by relying on evidence available to the applicant but not
      advanced at the time of an earlier claim. A similar concession was
      made in Manvinder Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department 
      [1995] EWCA Civ 53, where Stuart-Smith LJ noted that in his skeleton
      argument Mr Blake QC had accepted that Parliament could not have
      intended removal to be indefinitely deferred pending successive
      identical appeals. The observations in Ex p Onibiyo had been inspired
      by the possibility of abuse. The contours of the legislation had now
      changed. The opportunity to resolve the issue by bringing the
      amendment of the definitions in section 113 into force had not been
      taken. It was difficult to understand why, if its purpose was simply
      to clarify, it had not been brought into force. As it was, the
      legislation had to be taken as it stood without regard to what may
      have been contemplated by the amendment.

          Discussion

  24. I have set out the competing arguments at some length, partly out of
      respect for the excellent submissions that were advanced by counsel
      on either side in the Chamber of the House of Lords on the occasion
      of the last sitting of the House in its judicial capacity, and partly
      because they demonstrate very clearly the essence of the issue that
      we must decide. Miss Laing invites us to follow Sir Thomas Bingham
      MR's analysis of the problem in R v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department, ex p Onibiyo, to hold that the words "an asylum claim, or
      a human rights claim" in section 92(4)(a) of the 2002 Act mean a
      first asylum or human rights claim or a second or subsequent claim
      which has been accepted by the Secretary of State as a "fresh claim",
      and that the procedure for determining whether or not a second or
      subsequent claim is a fresh claim is to be found in rule 353 of the
      Immigration Rules. Mr Husain on the other hand invites us to examine
      those words in the context of the current legislation read as a
      whole, taking full account of the progress of thinking since Ex p 
      Onibiyo as to how the problem of repeat claims should be addressed.
      He submits that there is no justification, in the light of the
      provisions for dealing with repeat claims that the 2002 Act contains,
      for enlarging upon the plain words of the statute.

  25. The strength of Miss Laing's argument lies in the fact that the
      definition of the phrase "claim for asylum" has remained, in
      substance, the same since its first appearance in section 1 of the
      1993 Act where it was said to mean –

              "a claim made by a person (whether before or after the coming
              into force of this section) that it would be contrary to the
              United Kingdom's obligations under the Convention for him to
              be removed from, or required to leave, the United Kingdom".

      The Convention there referred to was, of course, the Refugee
      Convention. The definition in section 167 of the 1999 Act was in
      substantially the same terms. Section 113 of the 2002 Act varies the
      language a little bit, because it calls this kind of claim "an asylum
      claim", introduces a requirement for it to be made at a place
      designated by the Secretary of State (no such place has been
      designated) and adds a definition in almost identical terms of "a
      human rights claim". The relevant phrase throughout is "a claim".

  26. In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Onibiyo the
      Secretary of State's argument that once there had been a claim for
      asylum and one appeal there could be no further "claim for asylum"
      unless the claimant had left the United Kingdom and returned before
      making the fresh application was rejected. It was held that there
      could be a fresh "claim for asylum" with the same consequences as to
      the right of appeal as follow on the refusal of an initial claim,
      provided that the Secretary of State recognised the fresh claim as a
      "claim for asylum". If one looks no further and applies what Bennion
      on Statutory Interpretation (5th ed, 2008), section 201 and Part XIV
      described as "the informed interpretation rule", there is plainly
      much to be said for the view that the definitions that are set out in
      section 113 of the 2002 Act should be read in the same way. The
      procedure for determining whether a repeat claim is or is not a
      "fresh claim" is set out in rule 353 of the Immigration Rules, the
      effect of which I attempted to explain in Z T (Kosovo) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 348, para 33. It is a
      short step to conclude that a repeat claim which is not held under
      rule 353 to be a fresh claim falls to be disregarded as "an asylum
      claim, or a human rights claim" for the purposes of section 92(4)(a).
      Like Lloyd LJ, I would not draw an inference either way from the
      amendment of section 113 by section 12 of the 2006 Act as it is not
      yet in force.

  27. It is an elementary principle, however, that the words of a statute
      should be construed in the context of the scheme of the statute as a
      whole. And it is plain that the scheme of the 2002 Act is not the
      same as that of the 1993 Act to which Sir Thomas Bingham MR addressed
      himself in Ex p Onibiyo. The problem to which he addressed himself
      was created by the absence of any provision in the statute to prevent
      abuse. The question was how that gap might best be filled, having
      regard to the fact that the blunt solution that was proposed by the
      Secretary of State would, as the Master of the Rolls pointed out at p
      781, undermine the beneficial object of the Convention and the
      measures giving effect to it in this country.

  28. Parliament might, of course, have stood still and left the matter to
      be dealt with under the Immigration Rules. But it has not stood
      still. The experience of the intervening years has been taken into
      account. First, there were the provisions against abuse in sections
      73 to 77 of the 1999 Act. Now there is a set of entirely new
      provisions in the 2002 Act. As Lord Hoffmann said in A v Hoare 
      [2008] UKHL 6, [2008] 1 AC 844, para 15, while there is a good deal
      of authority for having regard in the construction of a statute to
      the way a word or phrase has been construed by the court in earlier
      statutes, the value of such previous interpretation as a guide to
      construction will vary with the circumstances. In this case the
      phrase in question has remained, in essence, unchanged. But the
      system in which it must be made to work is very different. This is a
      factor to which full weight must be given.

  29. The new system contains a range of powers that enable the Secretary
      of State or, as the case may be, an immigration officer to deal with
      the problem of repeat claims. The Secretary of State's power in
      section 94(2) of the 2002 Act to certify that a claim is clearly
      unfounded, if exercised, has the effect that the person may not bring
      his appeal in-country in reliance on section 92(4). The power in
      section 96 enables the Secretary of State or an immigration officer
      to certify that a person who is subject to a new immigration decision
      has raised an issue which has been dealt with, or ought to have been
      dealt with, in an earlier appeal against a previous immigration
      decision, which has the effect that the person will have no right of
      appeal against the new decision. It is common ground that the present
      cases are not certifiable under either of these two sections. Why
      then should they be subjected to a further requirement which is not
      mentioned anywhere in the 2002 Act? It can only be read into the Act
      by, as Sedley LJ in the Court of Appeal put it, glossing the meaning
      of the words "a…claim" so as to exclude a further claim which has not
      been held under rule 353 to be a fresh claim: [2009] 2 WLR 1370,
      paras 20, 30. The court had to do this in Ex p Onibiyo. But there is
      no need to do this now.

  30. It is not just that there is no need now to read those words into the
      statute. As Mr Husain pointed out, the two systems for excluding
      repeat claims are not compatible. Take the system that section 94
      lays down for dealing with claims that the Secretary of State
      considers to be clearly unfounded. If he issues a certificate to that
      effect, the appeal must be pursued out of country. But the claimant
      will have the benefit of section 94(9), which provides that where a
      person in relation to whom a certificate under that section
      subsequently brings an appeal under section 82(1) while outside the
      United Kingdom the appeal will be considered as if he had not been
      removed from the United Kingdom. He will have the benefit too of the
      passage in parenthesis in section 95, which provides:

              "A person who is outside the United Kingdom may not appeal
              under section 82(1) on the ground specified in section
              84(1)(g) (except in a case to which section 94(9) applies)."

  31. If Miss Laing is right, the effect of a decision by the Secretary of
      State that the representations that a person makes against an
      immigration decision of the kind mentioned in section 82(1)(k) – a
      refusal to revoke a deportation order – is not a fresh claim will be
      that an appeal against that decision must be brought out of country.
      But the interpretative route by which she reaches that position does
      not save that person from the exclusionary rule in section 95, unless
      – which has not been done in these cases – the claims are also
      certified under section 94(2) as clearly unfounded. The ground of
      appeal referred to in section 84(1)(g) has been designed to honour
      the international obligations of the United Kingdom. To exclude
      claims which the Secretary of State considers not to be fresh claims
      from this ground of appeal, when claims which he certifies as clearly
      unfounded are given the benefit of it, can serve no good purpose. On
      the contrary, it risks undermining the beneficial objects of the
      Refugee Convention which the court in Onibiyo, under a legislative
      system which had no equivalent to section 95, was careful to avoid.

  32. In my opinion Lloyd LJ in the Court of Appeal was right to attach
      importance to this point: [2009] 2 WLR 1370, paras 39-40. As he said,
      the development of the legislative provisions and the powers given to
      the Secretary of State to limit the scope for in country appeals
      deprive Miss Laing's submissions of the foundation which they need.
      There is obviously a balance to be struck. The immigration appeals
      system must not be burdened with worthless repeat claims. On the
      other hand, procedures that are put in place to address this problem
      must respect the United Kingdom's international obligations. That is
      what the legislative scheme does, when section 95 is read together
      with section 94(9). It preserves the right to maintain in an out of
      country appeal that the decision in question has breached
      international obligations. I would hold that claims which are not
      certified under section 94 or excluded under section 96, if rejected,
      should be allowed to proceed to appeal in-country under sections 82
      and 92, whether or not they are accepted by the Secretary of State as
      fresh claims.

  33. There is no doubt, as I indicated in Z T (Kosovo) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 348, para 33, that rule
      353 was drafted on the assumption that a claimant who made further
      submissions would be at risk of being removed or required to leave
      immediately if he does not have a "fresh claim". That was indeed the
      case when this rule was originally drafted, as there was no
      equivalent of section 92(4) of the 2002 Act. But Mr Husain's analysis
      has persuaded me that the legislative scheme that Parliament has now
      put in place does not have that effect. Its carefully interlocking
      provisions, when read as a whole, set out the complete code for
      dealing with repeat claims. Rule 353, as presently drafted, has no
      part to play in the legislative scheme. As an expression of the will
      of Parliament, it must take priority over the rules formulated by the
      executive. Rule 353A on the other hand remains in place as necessary
      protection against premature removal until the further submissions
      have been considered by the Secretary of State.

          Conclusion

  34. I would dismiss these appeals and affirm the orders made by the Court
      of Appeal.

          LORD SCOTT

  35. I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Lord
      Hope and am persuaded that for the reasons he has given these appeals
      should be dismissed. I am in full agreement also with the comments
      made by Lord Brown whose judgment I have also had the advantage of
      reading in draft.

          LORD RODGER

  36. I agree with the judgment of Lord Hope and with the additional
      observations of Lord Brown.

  37. The submission for the Home Secretary that the expression "an asylum
      claim" in section 92(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 should be given the same meaning as Sir Thomas Bingham gave
      to the expression "a claim for asylum" in section 6 of the Asylum and
      Immigration Appeals Act 1993 is at first sight compelling. Certainly,
      the change in the form of the expression is irrelevant. The contexts
      within which the two expressions have to be interpreted are, however,
      relevant. And, as Lord Hope explains, they are significantly
      different, since the 2002 Act contains a new scheme for dealing with
      abusive claims. Given that new scheme, there is no longer the same
      need to adopt the former interpretation and, indeed, the one now
      adopted fits the new context better.

          LADY HALE

  38. I am afraid that I have reached a different conclusion from the other
      members of the Court. There is no need to explain my views in detail
      as it will make no difference to the result.

  39. We are concerned with the meaning of the word "claim" in section
      92(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. When
      that Act was passed, it had been understood since 1996 that in this
      context the word "claim" referred to a first claim, or to a second or
      subsequent claim which was different from any earlier claim, but not
      to a second or subsequent claim which was merely repetitious of an
      earlier claim. This eminently sensible conclusion had been reached by
      a Court of Appeal led by Sir Thomas Bingham MR in R v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department, ex parte Onibiyo [1996] QB 768. It is
      a well-known principle of statutory interpretation that when
      Parliament re-enacts words which have already been the subject of
      judicial interpretation it intends them to have the same meaning.
      There was no need, therefore, for Parliament to spell out what it
      meant by a "claim" in section 92(4)(a). It was already well-known.

  40. In Onibiyo the Court also considered whether the decision that a
      "claim" was a "claim" was a question of precedent fact for the court
      to decide or a question for the Secretary of State to decide subject
      to challenge on the usual judicial review grounds. It was not
      necessary to decide this question in that case, but the Master of the
      Rolls "inclined" to the latter view. This was adopted by the Court of
      Appeal in later cases: see eg WM (DRC) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495, [2007] Imm AR 337; R (AK) (Sri
      Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
      447. Rule 353 of the Immigration Rules sets out the test which the
      Secretary of State applies in making his decision. It should not be
      thought, however, that Miss Laing's argument depends upon the
      existence and wording of rule 353. That merely provides for how the
      Secretary of State reaches his decision as to whether or not a claim
      is a "claim". It is not the end of the matter. The Secretary of
      State's test might come under attack for not reflecting the "acid
      test" laid down by the Master of the Rolls in Onibiyo. His conclusion
      reached in an individual case might come under attack on Wednesbury 
      or other conventional grounds. The conclusion of the Court of Appeal,
      that this is not a question of precedent fact, to be determined by
      the appellate authorities and ultimately by the courts, might be
      challenged in the Supreme Court. Miss Laing's argument is simply that
      when Parliament enacted section 92(4)(a) of the 2002 Act it thought
      that the meaning of "an asylum claim, or a human rights claim," was
      already well established and did not include a claim which was merely
      repetitious of an earlier one. She is not relying on rule 353 to
      construe the 2002 Act.

  41. I am not persuaded by Mr Husain's argument, attractively though it
      was put, that the new powers under sections 94 and 96 to restrict or
      deny appeals put such an entirely new complexion on matters that
      Parliament is to be taken to have abandoned the old meaning of
      "claim" without saying so. This would be astonishing given that it is
      apparently common ground that neither of these claims would have been
      certifiable under either section. Section 94 removes the right of
      in-country (but not out-country) appeal if an asylum or human rights
      claim is "clearly unfounded". Yet apparently it is not suggested that
      the fact that a claim has been made previously and rejected
      necessarily means that it is "clearly unfounded". Section 96 removes
      the right of appeal altogether if a claim or application raises
      matters which could have been raised on an appeal against an earlier
      decision. This does not deal with a claim which raises exactly the
      same matters as were rejected on an earlier occasion. So it is common
      ground that these new powers are not apt to cater for repetitious
      claims. If so, I cannot understand how Parliament, by introducing
      them, can be taken to have departed from an established
      interpretation which was designed to deal with a different problem.

  42. Nor am I persuaded by the argument that, if an asylum or human rights
      claim is certified under section 94, the claimant can still raise his
      asylum or human rights arguments in an out-of-country appeal, but
      that otherwise section 95 prevents a person from raising asylum or
      human rights grounds from outside the country. A person whose claim
      is certified under section 94 is denied any right of appeal in this
      country, but may appeal from outside. It is only right in those
      circumstances that he should be able to appeal on the same grounds
      that he could have raised in this country. A person whose claim is
      not a claim at all, because essentially the same claim has already
      been determined, has already enjoyed rights of appeal on asylum or
      human rights grounds in this country. There is no reason to give him
      a second bite at the cherry whether here or abroad.

  43. This country is bound not to expel people in breach of their human
      rights or when they have a well-founded fear of persecution in their
      home country. We must of course have a fair system for deciding
      whether expulsion will be in breach of those obligations. An initial
      decision followed by an appeal system in this country is sufficient
      to do this. This country is not bound to allow people to make
      essentially the same claim time and time again as a way of staving
      off their departure. The interpretation put forward by Miss Laing
      accords with our international obligations, as well as with principle
      and practicality. I would have allowed this appeal.

          LORD BROWN

  44. I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Lord
      Hope and am in full agreement with him that these appeals should be
      dismissed. I would make it clear, however, that this is not a
      conclusion at which I readily arrived and I reached it only on the
      basis that, as Mr Husain in his enticing submissions readily
      accepted, the statutory solution to the problem of abuse created by
      the making of repeat asylum claims lies not in construing "an asylum
      claim" in section 92(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 as the Court of Appeal in R v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department ex parte Onibiyo [1996] QB 768 construed "a claim for
      asylum" in section 6 of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993
      but rather in the Secretary of State issuing certificates where
      appropriate under sections 94 or 96 of the 2002 Act (no equivalent
      provisions having been available under the 1993 Act).

  45. True it is, as observed by Lord Hope in paragraph 29 of his judgment
      (and noted also at paragraph 13 of Sedley LJ's judgment in the Court
      of Appeal [2009] 2 WLR 1370), that it is common ground between the
      parties that the present cases are not certifiable under either of
      these sections. That, however, as I understand it, is solely because,
      so far as section 94 is concerned, it applies only "where the
      appellant has made an asylum claim or a human rights claim (or both)"
      (subsection 1). By the same token that, on the Secretary of State's
      argument, a repeat claim does not fall within those words in section
      92 (4)(a), so he contends that it does not do so for section 94
      purposes. Given, however, as Mr Husain submits and I would accept,
      that a repeat claim does involve making a claim for the purposes of
      section 92(4)(a), so too it enables the Secretary of State to certify
      it as "clearly unfounded" if he so regards it under section 94.
      Moreover, consistently with what the House said in ZT (Kosovo) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 348 (Lord
      Neuberger's views expressed at paragraphs 80-81 of his opinion being
      determinative on this point), there will be precious few cases in
      which that test differs from the rule 353 test as to whether a claim
      has "a realistic prospect of success".

  46. The major reason why finally I am persuaded that the respondent's
      approach is the correct one is that, so far from leaving the critical
      words "an asylum claim" in section 92(4)(a) to be construed as the
      Court of Appeal in Onibiyo construed "a claim for asylum" in the 1993
      Act, Parliament in the 2002 Act not only made express provisions to
      deal with abusive claims but split up different aspects of the
      possible abuse between sections 94 and 96. Sir Thomas Bingham MR in 
      Onibiyo had said (at pp783-784):

              "The acid test must always be whether, comparing the new
              claim with that earlier rejected, and excluding material on
              which the claimant could reasonably have been expected to
              rely in the earlier claim, the new claim is sufficiently
              different from the earlier claim to admit of a realistic
              prospect that a favourable view could be taken of the new
              claim despite the unfavourable conclusion reached on the
              earlier claim."

      "[Ex]cluding material on which the claimant could reasonably have
      been expected to rely in the earlier claim" is now expressly dealt
      with by section 96. As already explained, ordinary repeat claims fall
      to be excluded under section 94.

  47. As Lord Hope points out, moreover, there is one very clear advantage
      in providing for any abuse by making repeat claims to be dealt with
      by section 94 rather than rule 353: by virtue of sections 94(9), 95
      and 84(1)(g) it allows an out of country appeal to be brought on
      human rights grounds when otherwise that would not be possible.

  48. For these reasons, therefore, which in large part echo those given in
      Lord Hope's altogether fuller judgment, I too would dismiss these
      appeals.